Gunnm: Mars Chronicle (銃夢火星戦記, Ganmu Kasei Senki, lit. "Gun Dream: Martian War Chronicles"), also known in its English translation as Battle Angel Alita: Mars Chronicle, is a Japanese science fiction manga series written by Yukito Kishiro and the third installment of the Battle Angel Alita series.  The sequel to Battle Angel Alita: Last Order, the series is the "final chapter" in the Battle Angel Alita franchise.
The story of Mars Chronicles alternates between two timelines: ES 594, three years directly after the event of Last Order, when Alita returns to her home planet Mars for the first time in centuries; and ES 373, during Alita's childhood as the young cyborg girl Yoko trying to survive in the war-torn Mars.


== Plot ==

Three years after the 10th ZOTT, Alita visits Mars to honor the slaughtered inhabitants of an orphanage she lived at during childhood. At the memorial site, she re-encounters her childhood friend and fellow Künstler Erica — the infamous assassin known as "Frau X" — and is immediately drawn into a Martian power struggle.  The plot repeatedly shifts back to Alita's childhood memory after the young Yoko (Alita) and her sisterly companion Erica were saved at the minefield by Gerda and later left in the care of an elderly wandering medic Finch, and the adventures the pair had to endure in order to survive in the chaotic Martian civil conflicts leading up to the Terraforming Wars.  Determined to save her childhood companion from the control of the Einherjar, Alita vows to unveil the truth and discover the cure of Necro-Soldiers.


== Release ==

Yukito Kishiro announced the series on 1 January 2014, with the premiere set for the second half of 2014. His Battle Angel Alita: Last Order manga ended later that month.  The manga was launched in Kodansha's Evening magazine on 28 October 2014.  Battle Angel Alita: Mars Chronicle is set to be the "final chapter" in the Battle Angel Alita series. Kodansha USA have licensed the manga for a U.S. release.


== References ==


== External links ==
Gunnm: Mars Chronicle at Evening (in Japanese)
Battle Angel Alita: Mars Chronicle  at Anime News Network's encyclopedia