Aloha, Scooby-Doo! is a 2005 direct-to-video animated comedy horror mystery film, and the eighth in a series of  direct-to-video animated films based upon the Scooby-Doo Saturday morning cartoons. It was produced and completed in 2004 by Warner Bros. Animation and was released on February 8, 2005 by Warner Bros. Family Entertainment, though it featured a copyright and logo for Hanna-Barbera Cartoons at the end. The film aired on Cartoon Network on May 13, 2005.It is also Ray Bumatai's last performance before his death in October 2005. This movie, along with Scooby-Doo and the Cyber Chase, were the first Scooby-Doo movies to be re-released on Blu-ray on April 5, 2011.


== Plot ==
The gang travels to Hawaii on a free trip from a surf-and-beachwear company called "Goha Aloha" thanks to Daphne, whom the company wants to design some new swimwear for them. The gang also goes there to see the Big Kahuna of Hanahuna Surfing Contest. However, the contest used to only be open for the natives and not for mainlanders, but now the mayor has made it open for everybody. Many locals are angry because of this, especially Manu Tuiama, a local surfer, and his friend, Little Jim. Just a few days before the contest, the demons of the evil Wiki-Tiki spirit attacked the village and kidnapped Manu's girlfriend, Snookie. This drives away most of the tourists and surfers, and the locals believe the spirit is angry that the surfing contest is open to anybody, and also that a new resort, Coconut Beach Condominiums, is being built on supposedly sacred ground by local real estate agent Ruben Laluna. When the gang meets Jared Moon, a representative from the Goha Aloha-company in Hanahuna, he's selling tiki charms that are supposed to ward off evil demons. The mayor refuses to postpone the contest, even after the Tiki demons attack again at a feast.
The gang wants to get to the bottom of the mystery, and go to Auntie Mahina, a local shaman who lives deep in the jungle. On the way there, Manu seemingly gets kidnapped by the Wiki-Tiki. Auntie Mahina tells them the Wiki-Tiki is angry at the mainlanders; the surfing contest is hinted by her to be a Hawaiian ritual and that the winner has to be of Hawaiian descent. She says they need to go to the cave where the monster lives to get rid of it, or Snookie and Manu will be sacrificed in the volcano. She also gives Fred a necklace which should keep the monster away. The necklace is filled with an extract from a sacred root called bola gawana, which she claims that the ancients used to repel away evil spirits. The gang goes to the cave, and get chased by bats and the little demons, until they lose them and find Snookie, who tries to lead them out before getting recaptured by the Wiki-Tiki, who is seemingly unaffected by the necklace.
The gang then find themselves in a snake pit cave, but are able to get out of it because of music by Shaggy and Scooby-Doo. After escaping, the gang does some searching and stumbles upon a cave within the volcano, during which they discover that the volcano is in fact still dormant and that the Wiki-Tiki and its demons are not really ancient spirits. The little demons turn out to just be remote-controlled robots. After looking at a picture of the Wiki-Tiki when it was out surfing, the gang notices that the (supposedly) 10,000-year-old spirit 
its using a Goha Aloha-brand surfboard.
Back at the island, it is only one day until the contest, and the locals are really scared something bad will happen. Little Jim blames the mayor for Snookie and Manu's disappearances, and says that whatever happens during the contest will be her fault as well.
The following day, Daphne enters the contest in hopes of drawing out the Wiki-Tiki, whom they are sure will show up. Sure enough, it comes and scares the surfers and chases Shaggy and Scooby, until it was washed up by a wave. The gang unmasks the Wiki-Tiki as Manu and after Snookie runs over to him, it turns out that the couple were the culprits behind the Wiki-Tiki scheme. The gang explains that Manu and Snookie wanted to scare off both the locals and the tourists so they could buy up all the real estate in the area and then sell it back to the original owners at a huge profit—and all the places bought by Manu and Snookie were put under the name of "Pamela Waeawa," which is Snookie's real name. Velma also reveals that Snookie's an expert in both rocket science and robotics, and was the one who created the so-called "demons." The mayor ultimately announces Scooby as the winner of the surfing contest (for the way he and Shaggy were surfing while battling Manu), making him the new "Big Kahuna of Hanahuna." Manu expresses shock and anger at losing to a dog as he and Snookie are arrested and taken to jail.
Later that night, a big luau is held in celebration at the hotel that the gang was staying at. Everyone thanks the gang for solving mystery and Ruben Laluna reveals that all the real estate bought by Manu and Snookie will be returned to the original owners. Jared Moon comes by to tell that Goha Aloha loved her swimsuit designs and wants to buy them (and he gives her a free tiki charm). After Auntie Mahina thanks the gang for what they did, the mini-tikis come to the party and advance—but instead of attacking people, they start dancing. It's revealed that Scooby has the remote control for them and he's the one making them dance. Everyone laughs while Scooby says his catchphrase before saying "Aloha!".


== Voice cast ==
Frank Welker as Fred Jones, Scooby-Doo, Wiki-Tiki
Casey Kasem as Shaggy Rogers
Grey DeLisle as Daphne Blake, Auntie Mahina, Local Woman #2
Mindy Cohn as Velma Dinkley
Mario Lopez as Manu Tuiama
Ray Bumatai as Little Jim
Teri Garr as Mayor Molly Quinn
Adam West as Jared Moon
Tom Kenny as Ruben Laluna
Dee Bradley Baker as Tiny Tiki/Surfer on Bike/California Surfer Dude/Local Guy #1/Wild Pig/Gecko/Flame Thrower
Tia Carrere as Snookie


== References ==


== External links ==
Aloha, Scooby-Doo! at IMDb
Aloha, Scooby-Doo! at AllMovie