Anger Management is a 2003 American buddy comedy film directed by Peter Segal and written by David S. Dorfman. Starring Adam Sandler, Jack Nicholson, Marisa Tomei, Luis Guzmán, Woody Harrelson, and John Turturro, the film tells the story of a businessman who is sentenced to an anger management program under a renowned therapist with unconventional methods. Anger Management was released in theaters in the United States on April 11, 2003, by Columbia Pictures and grossed $195.7 million against a $75 million budget.


== Plot ==
In 1978 Brooklyn, as a young Dave Buznik is about to experience his first kiss, he is humiliated by local bully Arnie Shankman who suddenly pulls down his pants and underwear.
Twenty-five years later, Dave works as a secretary for a disrespectful boss named Frank. Dave's bullying trauma causes him to avoid displaying affection such as kissing his girlfriend Linda in public. His problems are exacerbated by his narcissistic co-worker, Andrew, who is close friends with Linda and desires to rekindle their romantic relationship.
During a flight Dave loses his temper, albeit mildly, after being treated disrespectfully by the flight attendant, prompting the sky marshal to taser him. He is arrested for "assaulting" a flight attendant and is sentenced to anger management under Dr Buddy Rydell, a renowned therapist who sat next to him on the plane. Dave's sentence is extended to 30 days after he accidentally breaks a waitress’s nose while defending himself. 
Buddy elects to live with Dave and accompany him at work as part of his "radical round-the-clock therapy". This entails unorthodox techniques which cause Dave to be passive aggressive. At Dave's workplace Buddy is shocked to learn of the well endowed Andrew's friendship with Linda. However, Buddy sees a photo of Linda and becomes instantly smitten by her, annoying Dave. To enhance Dave's assertiveness Buddy arranges for him to get revenge on Arnie Shankman, who has become a Buddhist monk. Arnie apologises to Dave, but he laughs when reminded of the kiss incident. Buddy and an initially hesitant Dave provoke Arnie by lying about Dave molesting Arnie's mentally ill sister. A fight ensues, and after defeating Arnie the duo flee and Dave is delighted to have had his revenge. 
Linda tells Dave she has agreed to follow Buddy's advice that they have a trial separation; Buddy explains to Dave that this is to give him time to improve his behaviour. Dave attacks Buddy when he learns he and Linda have begun dating. Dave returns to court where Buddy is issued with a restraining order against him. Dave snaps at work when he learns Frank promoted Andrew to the position he had expected. He punches Andrew in the face and wrecks Frank's office with a golf club. 
Learning from Andrew that Buddy has taken Linda to a New York Yankees game, Dave assumes Buddy intends to steal his marriage proposal idea and races to the stadium. Security captures him but New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani orders them to allow Dave to speak. Linda is moved when Dave announces publicly that he is willing to change. At her request Dave kisses Linda in front of the crowd and she accepts his proposal. Linda then reveals that the game was the final phase of his therapy and explains that the aggravation he endured was all Buddy's doing. She adds that most of the people involved were in on Buddy's plans.


== Cast ==
Adam Sandler as David "Dave" Buznik
Jonathan Osser as Young Dave Buznik
Jack Nicholson as Dr. Buddy Rydell
Marisa Tomei as Linda
Luis Guzmán as Lou
Jonathan Loughran as Nate
Kurt Fuller as Frank Head
Krista Allen as Stacy
January Jones as Gina
Clint Black as Masseur
John Turturro as Chuck
Lynne Thigpen as Judge Brenda Daniels
This film turned out to be Thigpen's final film. She died a month before the film's release; the film is dedicated in her memory.
Woody Harrelson as Galaxia the tranvestite prostitute/Gary the Security Guard
Kevin Nealon as Sam, Dave's Lawyer
Allen Covert as Andrew
Nancy Carell as Patty the Flight Attendant
John C. Reilly (uncredited) as Older Monk Arnie Shankman
Alan James Morgan as Young Arnie Shankman
Heather Graham (uncredited) as Kendra
Harry Dean Stanton (uncredited) as Blind Man
Isaac C. Singleton Jr. as Air Marshal
Stephen Dunham as Maitre d'
Cody Arens as Boy at Yankee StadiumSeveral others appeared as themselves, such as:

John McEnroe
Derek Jeter
Robert Merrill
Bob Sheppard
Judith Nathan
Bob Knight
Roger Clemens
Rudy Giuliani


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 42% based on reviews from 194 critics, with an average rating of 5.15/10. The site's consensus reads: "Though not without its funny moments, Anger Management is ultimately stale and disappointingly one-note, especially considering its capable cast."  On Metacritic the film has an average score of 52 out of 100 based on 39 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade B on scale of A to F.


=== Box office ===
The film was number one at the box office on its opening weekend, April 11-13, 2003, earning $42,220,847. It earned a total of $135,645,823 in the U.S. with a total worldwide box office of $195,745,823.


== TV series adaptation ==

A television series based on the film premiered on June 28, 2012, starring Charlie Sheen in the role originated by Jack Nicholson; the series was Sheen's first acting role since his firing from the hit CBS sitcom Two and a Half Men on March 7, 2011, after eight seasons.  The show was produced by the film's producer Joe Roth, and was broadcast on FX in the United States, CTV in Canada and on TBS in Latin America for two seasons, totalling 100 episodes before it was cancelled.


== References ==


== External links ==
Anger Management at IMDb
Anger Management at AllMovie