Aquamarine is a 2006 American teen fantasy romantic comedy film directed by Elizabeth Allen, loosely based on the 2001 young adult novel of the same name by Alice Hoffman. It stars Emma Roberts, Joanna "JoJo" Levesque, and Sara Paxton. The film was released in the United States on March 3, 2006, by 20th Century Fox.


== Plot ==
Best friends Claire and Hailey are enjoying their last few days of summer together in their small beach town Baybridge, near Tampa, Florida, before Hailey moves to Australia because of her mother's work as a marine biologist. Hailey prays to the ocean god for a miracle that will make her mother change her mind about moving. Minutes later, a violent storm occurs. The next night, the girls discover a mermaid named Aquamarine in the pool. She has run away from home. They become friends and Aquamarine tells them that she needs to prove to her father that true love exists or she will be forced to marry a man she does not know. Aquamarine (who is able to change her tail into legs during the day as long as she does not get wet) has set her eyes on Raymond, the lifeguard Hailey and Claire have had a crush on for years. They are reluctant but when Aquamarine explains that you get a wish if you help a mermaid, they agree to help in hopes that they can prevent Hailey from leaving.
Because Aquamarine is not human, she does not understand how love works and is rejected by Raymond when they first meet. The girls promise to make Raymond fall in love with her in the next three days, using strategies found in teen magazines. A group of popular girls headed by Cecilia, the spoiled daughter of the local meteorologist who also has a crush on Raymond, get in the way.
Aquamarine and Raymond bond at a party but she flees since she transforms back at sunset. Before leaving, she kisses Raymond and asks him to meet her on the pier in the morning. Cecilia follows the three girls to the water tower where Aquamarine is staying, and discovers her secret. She unhooks the ladder to prevent Aquamarine from getting down and calls the news so she can expose her on national television. However, the town's mysterious handyman helps her and Aquamarine grants him a wish.
The next morning, Aquamarine asks Raymond if he loves her. Raymond admits that he likes her but has not fallen in love with her yet as they have only been on one date; he wants to get there with her slowly. Aquamarine is heartbroken. Cecilia interrupts and pushes her into the ocean, where Aquamarine turns back into a mermaid. Raymond is shocked but rushes to get his rescue board to save her, much to Cecilia's angered dismay. Aquamarine's father calls her back home in a giant storm but Hailey and Claire jump into the ocean to save her. Aquamarine asks why they jumped in for her and they respond that they love her. Thus, the girls learn the meaning of friendship and Aquamarine proves to her father that love exists. The girls receive their wish but decide to not use it to keep Hailey from moving away since her mother worked hard for it. Instead, they save the wish and part ways with Aquamarine, who must get back to her family. She promises she will visit them. Raymond asks her to visit him as well and they kiss. Back on shore, Raymond thanks the girls for their bravery and for introducing him to Aquamarine. The girls tell each other they will miss one another.
In the stage booklet, it is revealed that a year later Claire, Raymond, and Aquamarine meet up with Hailey in Australia exploring the great coral reef together.


== Cast ==
Sara Paxton as Aquamarine
Emma Roberts as Claire Brown
JoJo as Hailey Rogers
Jake McDorman as Raymond
Arielle Kebbel as Cecilia Banks
Claudia Karvan as Ginny Rogers
Bruce Spence as Leonard
Tammin Sursok as Marjorie
Roy Billing as Bob Brown
Julia Blake as Maggie Brown
Shaun Micallef as Storm Banks
Lulu McClatchy as Bonnie
Natasha Cunningham as Patty
Dichen Lachman as Beth
Lincoln Lewis as Theo
Alice Hunter as Beach Girl
Benjamin Shields as Beach Boy


=== Voices ===
Sara Paxton as Aquamarine's Starfish Earrings
Emma Roberts as Claire "Clara" Brown's Starfish Earrings
JoJo as Hailey Rogers' Starfish Earrings


== Production ==
Principal photography for the movie began in Australia in February 2005, and wrapped up the following April.


== Home media ==
The film was released on DVD on June 13, 2006, and on Blu-ray on March 6, 2012.


== Reception ==
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 51% based on reviews from 89 critics, with an average rating of 5.44/10. The site's consensus states: "A lighthearted, gum-smacking, boy-crazy film with a hopeful message for young girls." On Metacritic, it has a weighted average score of 51 out of 100, based on 27 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews." Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade "A-" on scale of A to F.Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter called it "A bright and breezy tween fantasy romantic comedy that coasts along on its charming performances and the light comedic touch of first-time feature director Elizabeth Allen."
Variety's Joe Leydon praised the film saying it was an "unusually likeable family-friendly comedy that could appeal far beyond its target [audience]".


=== Box office ===
In its opening weekend, Aquamarine grossed $7.5 million in 2,512 theaters, ranking #5 at the box office. By the end of its run, the film grossed $18.6 million domestically, and $4.4 million internationally, for a worldwide total of $23 million.


=== Accolades ===


== Soundtrack ==
"One Original Thing" – Cheyenne Kimball
"Strike" – Nikki Flores
"Connected" – Sara Paxton
"Gentlemen" – Teddy Geiger
"One and Only" – Teitur
"Island in the Sun" – Emma Roberts
"Time for Me to Fly" – Jonas Brothers
"Can't Behave" – Courtney Jaye
"Summertime Guys" – Nikki Cleary
"One Way or Another" – Mandy Moore
"Sweet Troubled Soul" – Stellastarr
"I Like the Way You Move" – BodyrockersTwo of the film's main stars, Emma Roberts and Sara Paxton, were featured on the soundtrack. In 2008, La La Land Records released a limited edition CD (1000 pressings) of David Hirschfelder's score (incorporating the voice of Paxton) for the film.

"Main Titles"
"The Storm"
"Washed Ashore"
"Claire Falls In"
"Meeting Aqua"
"The Next Morning/Shell Phone Call"
"Making the Deal"
"Ray & Aqua/Magazines"
"Paddleboat Date"
"The Water Tower"
"Hailey Rides the Dolphins"
"Aqua's Decision"
"First Kiss"
"Cecilia Climbs the Tower"
"Hailey and Claire Argue"
"The Pier/Storm/The Buoy"
"The Tear/Goodbyes"
"Finale"Other songs featured in the film"A Comer Chicharron (Guaracha)" – Charanga Cubana
"City Girls Jr." – Simon Leadley
"Control Me" – The A Team
"Dejenme Vivir" – Charanga Cubana
"Don't Cry Baby" – Alana Dafonseca
"Drive Me Crazy" – Miss Eighty 6
"I Rock Hard" – Miss Eighty 6
"Island in the Sun" – Halfday
"Big Wave – Pearl Jam
"Underground" – Puretone
"Smile" – Vitamin C
"Right Now 2004" - Atomic Kitten


== See also ==
Mermaids in popular culture


== References ==


== External links ==
Aquamarine at IMDb
Aquamarine at AllMovie
Aquamarine at Box Office Mojo