Bait is a 2000 American-Canadian action comedy starring Jamie Foxx and David Morse. It was directed by Antoine Fuqua. The film was a huge financial failure, costing Warner Bros. $51 million but only grossing approximately $15 million.


== Plot ==
When fast talking, petty thief and hustler Alvin Sanders (Jamie Foxx) gets arrested for stealing prawns, the worst of his problems would seem to be going to jail. Unfortunately, he ends up sharing a cell with John Delano Jaster (Robert Pastorelli) a guy who, while stealing $42 million in gold from the Federal Reserve, double-crossed his  partner, Bristol (Doug Hutchison), after he murdered two bound and gagged guards during the gold heist. Bristol, the mastermind of the heist, is Jaster’s dangerous partner with a knack for computers, a long memory, and who will go to any lengths to find where Jaster hid the gold.  While being interrogated by hardball Treasury Agent Edgar Clenteen (David Morse), the double-crosser dies from heart failure. All the feds have are an incomprehensible message that was left with Alvin, so they decide to release him and use him as bait to catch the partner by secretly implanting a combination tracking device and electronic bug into Alvin's jaw. From that moment on, a surveillance team can follow Alvin's every move and hear his every word. Unfortunately, Alvin has a talent for getting into trouble especially with his criminal younger brother Stevie (Mike Epps)—which means that the feds have to become his guardian angels so that he can serve his purpose. Sure enough, Bristol is hot on Alvin’s trail, using his computer expertise to discover that Alvin was jailed alongside Jaster and managing to gain more information from him through a phony telephone call.  Alvin soon becomes suspicious of the many situations that has occurred since he has been released from prison, especially when he encounters Bristol face to face, yet eventually Bristol kidnaps Alvin while evading the authorities, causing an explosion from a bomb attached to a bound and gagged agent Wooly (David Paymer). After interrogating Alvin, Bristol forces Alvin to lead him to the gold supposedly hidden at the horse track in Manhattan, while holding his girlfriend Lisa (Kimberly Elise) and baby hostage. Alvin manages to eventually escape and fight off Bristol and free Lisa before a bomb set in the van they’re in explodes. Alvin manages to hot wire the van, drive it and jump out just in time before the bomb explodes. Bristol catches up to Alvin and points a gun at him, yet Clenteen shoots him multiple times, saving Alvin. A grateful Alvin, punches Clenteen due to earlier treatment while in jail, yet Clenteen, not upset by it, admits he had it coming.
Later on, Alvin, through a reference to the Bronx Zoo, finally understands the message Jaster told him, and  calls Clenteen to reveal the real location of the gold.


== Cast ==
Jamie Foxx as Alvin Sanders
David Morse as Edgar Clenteen
Doug Hutchison as Bristol
Kimberly Elise as Lisa Hill
David Paymer as Agent Wooly
Mike Epps as Stevie Sanders
Robert Pastorelli as John Delano Jaster
Jamie Kennedy as Agent Blum
Nestor Serrano as Agent Boyle
Kirk Acevedo as Ramundo
Jeffrey Donovan as Julio
Megan Dodds as Agent Walsh
Tia Texada as Tika
Neil Crone as Supervisor


== Reception ==
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 26%, based on reviews from 82 critics. The website's consensus reads, "Even though Jamie Foxx shines in Bait, the movie suffers from music video roots and a formulaic script that strains credibility." On Metacritic, it has a score of 39 out of 100, based on reviews from 28 critics.Roger Ebert gave it 3 out of 4 stars and wrote that "it's over the top, an exercise in action comedy that cuts loose from logic and enjoys itself."


=== Box office ===
The film opened at #2 at the North American box office making $5,485,591 USD in its opening weekend, behind The Watcher. Bait ultimately failed to bring back its $51 million budget, as it grossed only $15 million worldwide.


== Soundtrack ==

A soundtrack was released on September 12, 2000 by Warner Bros. Records featuring rap and R&B music. The soundtrack reached No. 49 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums.


== References ==


== External links ==
Bait at IMDb
Bait at Box Office Mojo