Be Kind Rewind is a 2008 buddy comedy film written and directed by Michel Gondry, and starring Jack Black, Mos Def, Melonie Diaz, Danny Glover, Mia Farrow and Sigourney Weaver. The film first appeared on January 20, 2008 at the 2008 Sundance Film Festival. It was later shown at the Berlin International Film Festival. The film opened on February 22, 2008 in the United Kingdom and in North America.
The title is inspired by a phrase that was commonly displayed on video rental cassettes in America during the medium's heyday.


== Plot ==
In Passaic, New Jersey, the declining "Be Kind Rewind" VHS rental store owned by Mr. Horace Fletcher is due to be demolished to make way for high-end development (due in large part to the refusal of Mr. Fletcher to rent out DVDs rather than outdated VHS video tapes) unless he can find the money to renovate his building, despite his claims that jazz pianist Fats Waller was born in that building. His building is condemned as a slum and the officials give him 60 days to upgrade the building to the required standards or they will demolish it.
Mr. Fletcher leaves on a trip for several days joining  some friends to memorialize Waller, as well as visiting a DVD rental store to learn efficient and modernized ways of running a video rental store, leaving his only employee, Mike, to tend to the store. Before leaving Mr. Fletcher cautions Mike to keep his paranoid and klutzy conspiracy theorist friend, Jerry, away from the store. However, Mike reads it in reverse on the steamed up train window, and does not understand.
After attempting to sabotage a nearby electrical substation, believing its energy to be melting his brain, Jerry receives an electrical shock which leaves him  magnetized, and when he enters the store the next day, he inadvertently erases all the VHS tapes in the store (as well as making the TV not work correctly, whenever he walks past it).
Mr Fletcher phones an acquaintance Miss Falewicz asking her to return the rented tape of Driving Miss Daisy. He asks her to keep an eye on his shop.
Mike quickly discovers the disaster, and is further pressed when Miss Falewicz, Mr. Fletcher's friend, wants to rent Ghostbusters.  To prevent her from reporting a problem to Mr. Fletcher, Mike comes up with an idea: as Miss Falewicz has never seen the movie, he proposes to recreate the film using himself and Jerry as the actors and cheap special effects hoping to fool her. They film it in the local library. They complete the movie just in time when another customer asks for Rush Hour 2.  Mike and Jerry repeat their filming, enlisting the help of Alma, a local woman, for some of the parts.
Word of mouth spreads through Miss Falewicz's nephew of the inadvertently hilarious results of Mike and Jerry's filming, and soon the store is seeing more requests for such movies.  Mike, Jerry, and Alma quickly pass off the movies as being "sweded", insisting the films came from Sweden and thus able to demand long wait times and higher costs for the rental ($20 instead of $1).  Soon, to meet demand, Mike and Jerry enlist the locals to help out in making the movies, using them as starring roles in their films.  When Mr. Fletcher returns, intent on converting the store to a DVD rental outlet, he quickly recognizes that they are making more money from the sweded films than from normal rentals, and joins in with the process.  However, the success is put to a halt when two court bailiffs arrive, insisting the sweded films are copyright violations, and seize the tapes and the store's assets, crushing the tapes with a steamroller. Without any money to renovate the building, Mr. Fletcher gives up hope, and is forced to reveal to Mike that he made up the connection of Fats Waller to their building.  Mr. Fletcher is given a week to evacuate the building before it will be razed.
Jerry, with the help of the local townspeople, convinces Mr. Fletcher and Mike to give one last hurrah and put together a documentary dedicated to the fake life of Fats Waller, and the two quickly warm up to the idea. They create Fats Waller Was Born Here.
On the day the building is scheduled for demolition, Mr. Fletcher invites all the locals to watch the final film.  In his eagerness to start the show due to the presence of the demolition crew waiting to start the job, Jerry accidentally breaks the store's only television, but a nearby DVD store owner loans them his video projector, allowing them to show the movie on a white cloth placed in the store's window.  As their film ends, Mr. Fletcher, Mike and Jerry exit the store to find a crowd has gathered in the street to watch the film through the window, including the city official and wrecking crew, and they are given a rousing applause by the gathered crowd.
The credits roll with more of the mockumentary and Fats Waller singing "Your Feet's Too Big".


== "Sweded" ==
Films that were erased and recreated are referred to as having been sweded. These remakes are unedited with only a single take per scene. The tapes are described as having come from Sweden as an excuse for higher rental fees and longer wait times. Jerry fabricated the word "sweded" while arguing with Craig (Chandler Parker) and his gang.
In light of the theme of sweding, director Michel Gondry sweded a version of the trailer of the film, starring himself. On the official website, users can engage in sweding, which puts their faces on the VHS cover of a movie. The Be Kind Rewind YouTube channel also encourages filmmakers to create sweded versions of popular movies.The theme of sweding also relates to film history, in that the collectively made remakes represent social memories of films, and memories that arise through films.


== Cast ==

Mos Def as Mike Coolwell
Jack Black as Jerry Mclean
Danny Glover as Horace Fletcher
Mia Farrow as Miss Falewicz
Melonie Diaz as Alma Sykes
Arjay Smith as Manny
Quinton Aaron as Q
Chandler Parker as Craig
Karolina Wydra as Gabrielle Bochenski
P. J. Byrne as Mr. Baker
Matt Walsh as Officer Julian
Paul Dinello as Mr. Rooney
Sigourney Weaver as Ms. Lawson
Marcus Carl Franklin as Kid #1
Booker T. Jones as Fats Waller's fan in train (uncredited)
Steve Cropper as Fats Waller's fan in train (uncredited)
Donald "Duck" Dunn as Fats Waller's fan in train (uncredited)
Jimmy Scott as Fats Waller's fan in train (uncredited)
McCoy Tyner as Fats Waller's fan in train (uncredited)
Jon Glaser as Video Store manager
Marco Quevedo as Cool Library Kid


== Reception ==
The film has received mostly positive reviews, with review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reporting that 65% of critics gave the film positive reviews, based on 128 reviews, with an average rating of 6.3/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Slighter and less disciplined than Gondry's previous mind-benders." Metacritic reported the film had an average score of 52 out of 100, based on 35 reviews. Writing in The New York Times, reviewer A. O. Scott called the film "inviting, undemanding and altogether wonderful" and added that "you'll want to see it again, or at least Swede it yourself."


=== Box office ===
In its opening weekend, the film earned $4 million in 808 theaters in the United States and Canada, ranking No. 9 at the box office, and averaging $5,013 per theater. As of September 21, 2008, the film had grossed $30.4 million worldwide—an estimated $11 million in the United States and Canada and $19 million in other territories.


== References ==


== External links ==
Be Kind Rewind at IMDb
Be Kind Rewind at Rotten Tomatoes
Be Kind Rewind at Metacritic
Be Kind Rewind at Box Office Mojo
Be Kind Rewind at AllMovie