Beauty Shop is a 2005 American comedy film directed by Bille Woodruff. The film serves as a spin-off of the Barbershop film franchise, and stars Queen Latifah as Gina, a character first introduced in the 2004 film Barbershop 2: Back in Business. This film also stars Alicia Silverstone, Andie MacDowell, Mena Suvari, Kevin Bacon and Djimon Hounsou.


== Plot ==
Gina Norris is a widowed hairstylist who has moved from Chicago to Atlanta so her daughter Vanessa can attend a private music school. She has made a name for herself as a stylist, but after her self-centered and domineering boss, Jorge, criticizes her decisions, she quits and sets up her own shop, purchasing a run-down salon with the help of a loan officer.
Upon buying the salon, she runs into instant barriers: loudmouthed young stylists, older clients who are fixed in their habits, an energetic young boy named Willie who constantly flirts with women (including Vanessa) while filming for his next music video, people wary of her ability as a hairdresser, and the constant trouble her rebellious sister-in-law, Darnelle, finds herself in. 
Gina issues an ultimatum with Darnelle to clean up her act and start paying her back or she will be evicted. In a short time, the previous owner's clients become her own and many of her former customers find their way from Jorge's to her salon. When electrical issues arise, she finds that the upstairs renter, Joe, is a handsome electrician from Africa who eventually bonds with Vanessa due to his skills on the piano. Because Jorge is jealous that his shop is losing clients to Gina's, he pays a health inspector named Crawford to find various ways to shut down Gina's business.
Over time, neighborhood regulars frequent the shop and the varied stylists become close to Gina, as does Joe. One of her former clients from Jorge's uses her connections to set up a meeting with CoverGirl for Gina's homemade miracle conditioner, affectionately called "hair crack".
Tragedy strikes when the shop is trashed and vandalized the night before Vanessa's big piano recital. When Gina next enters the shop, she finds not only that her staff has cleaned up the majority of the mess and brought items from home so the shop could operate, but Darnelle has also decided to grow up and enter beauty school. 
While filming for his next topic, Willie tapes a meeting between Jorge and Inspector Crawford and learns that they were responsible for trying to ruin Gina. Shortly after, a disheveled woman enters the shop and begs for someone to fix her hair for a wedding she has in a few hours. Soon after, Willie shows Gina the videotape of the meeting he filmed of Jorge and Inspector Crawford. Later that night, Gina goes to Jorge's salon to not only tell him about the tape, but that she knows he is not Jorge from Austria, but George Christie from Nebraska. As soon as Gina leaves, James (Gina's only male employee) and a few of his friends give Jorge an extreme haircut as payback for what he did to her in trying to close her shop.
Later, as the shop listens to their favorite radio talk-show host DJ Hollerin' Helen, they discover she was the desperate customer on the way to the wedding as she gives the shop (and Gina's "hair crack" conditioner) a shout-out on the radio.


== Cast ==

Cameo appearances

Birdman as Glen
Ki Toy Johnson as Debbie
Kimora Lee Simmons as Denise
LisaRaye McCoy as Rochelle
Wilmer Valderrama as Corky
Andrew Levitas as Stacy


== Reception ==
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 38%, based on reviews from 119 critics, with an average score of 5.35/10. The site's critics consensus reads: "Despite a strong performance by Queen Latifah, Beauty Shop is in need of some style pointers." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 53 rating, based on 28 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade A− on scale of A to F.Derek Armstrong of AllMovie gave the film three out of five stars, stating that while the film sticks to the same formula which made the Barbershop films so successful, it still "bursts with life, having attracted a spectrum of enthusiastic performers and a script that exceeds broad character types."


=== Awards and nominations ===
2005 BET Comedy Awards

Outstanding Directing for a Theatrical Film—Bille Woodruff (nominated)
Outstanding Lead Actress in a Theatrical Film—Queen Latifah (nominated)
Outstanding Theatrical Film (nominated)
Outstanding Writing for a Theatrical Film—Audrey Wells, Kate Lanier, Norman Vance Jr. (nominated)2005 Black Movie Awards

Outstanding Achievement in Writing—Kate Lanier, Norman Vance Jr. (nominated)
Outstanding Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role—Queen Latifah (nominated)2005 Teen Choice Awards

Choice Movie Actress: Comedy—Queen Latifah (nominated)
Choice Movie: Hissy Fit—Queen Latifah (nominated)
Choice Movie: Sleazebag—Kevin Bacon (nominated)
Choice Movie: Rap Artist—Queen Latifah (nominated)2006 Black Reel Awards

Best Actress—Queen Latifah (nominated)2006 NAACP Image Awards

Outstanding Actress in a Motion Picture—Queen Latifah (nominated)


== References ==


== External links ==
Beauty Shop at IMDb
Beauty Shop at Box Office Mojo
Beauty Shop at Metacritic
Beauty Shop at Rotten Tomatoes