Bubble Boy is a 2001 American comedy film directed by Blair Hayes, starring Jake Gyllenhaal in the title role. It was inspired by the 1976 movie The Boy in the Plastic Bubble. A musical by the same name was written by the same authors and first performed in 2008.


== Plot ==
Born without an immune system, Jimmy Livingston is forced to live in a sterilized dome in his bedroom in his home in California, earning him the nickname "Bubble Boy" by his neighbors. Jimmy's overbearing and devout Christian mother only exposes him to Highlights magazine and Land of the Lost for entertainment. When he is a teenager, a girl named Chloe moves in next door. Jimmy is immediately taken with her, and eventually befriends her despite his mother's discouragement.
Chloe visits Jimmy and tells him that she is leaving for Niagara Falls to marry her boyfriend, Mark, in three days. Jimmy  realizes that Chloe cares for him. Realizing how much he cares for her, Jimmy builds a mobile bubble suit and runs away from home, determined to stop the wedding.
On the first day of his journey, he's unable to afford a bus ride to Niagara Falls, but is picked up by an overly enthusiastic cult on a pilgrimage towards enlightenment. By this time, Jimmy's mother has discovered her son missing, so she and her husband set off to find Jimmy.
After being abandoned and left in the desert to die by the group, he travels through the desert and meets Slim, a biker with a flat tire. Jimmy offers to fix the flat with some patches and the two become friends. Elsewhere, Gil, the leader of the cult Jimmy met, has revealed that their messiah is "the round one," and that whoever rejects him will suffer. The group who abandoned Jimmy set off to find him. Jimmy and Slim have traveled to Las Vegas, Nevada for traveling money. However, Slim gets caught up in the Vegas life so Jimmy goes on without him. The cult runs into Slim in Vegas while asking for directions. Slim recognizes them from Jimmy's story and threatens them, only to have his bike destroyed by the cult bus.
Soon, Morton and Mrs. Livingston are driving along the highway to find Jimmy riding a motorized scooter he won in Vegas. After attempting to stop and catch him, Jimmy accidentally crashes and bounces onboard a train belonging to Dr. Phreak, a small man who collects “freaks” and shows them off to the public for money. When Dr. Phreak tries to recruit Jimmy to his show, Jimmy knocks him unconscious; allowing for Jimmy and the freaks to go their own way.
Jimmy uses a handcar to travel for a bit before ending up in a small town. He then wanders into a restaurant where an Indian man named Pushpop is being antagonized by the ignorant townspeople. When Jimmy tries to defend him, the townspeople begin to probe him about his suit, but panic and evacuate the restaurant when they misunderstand his illness. Due to a flammable object falling down, it begins burning the restaurant down and Jimmy attempts to escape the burning building but struggles. Pushpop busts open a wall and saves Jimmy. Pushpop thanks Jimmy for his earlier kindness and agrees to take him to Niagara Falls in his ice cream and curry truck. However, Pushpop accidentally hits and kills a cow with his ice cream truck and Jimmy is forced to continue on foot due to Pushpop’s culture as the cow is sacred to him. Meanwhile, Jimmy's parents have met up with Dr. Phreak, whom Jimmy's mother mistakes for a child and brings along with them. Elsewhere in Niagara Falls, Chloe is apprehensive about marrying Mark and can't stop thinking of Jimmy.
Jimmy eventually arrives in some kind of town, where he finds a taxi driver named Pappy, whom he asks to take him to New York. Unfortunately, the fare was $500 and Jimmy was short on money. Jimmy goes into a Chinese casino nearby and enters a mud wrestling competition for a prize of $500. Having won the prize, Jimmy exits the casino and prepares to hitch a ride in Pappy’s taxi, but is spotted and picked up by the cult bus as he heads back to the taxi. Luckily, the “freaks” have followed Jimmy and realizing he's in danger, disguise themselves as members of the cult and trick them into believing they're mutating for their earlier crimes against Jimmy. As Jimmy and the “freaks” try to escape, Slim and his gang arrive in Pushpop's ice cream truck (which they took after the cult bus destroyed all their bikes) and take Jimmy from the “freaks” thinking they belonged to the cult. A fight breaks out between the cult, Slim's gang and the “freaks” which Jimmy uses as a distraction to escape with Pappy.
On the last day of his journey, Pappy and Jimmy have now arrived in New York, but Pappy is unresponsive, having apparently died behind the wheel overnight, forcing Jimmy to abandon the moving taxi before it crashes. Jimmy tries to call Chloe to tell her of his success, only to reach her fiancé Mark, who rudely convinces him that Chloe doesn't really love him and tells him to go back home. Jimmy becomes depressed at this assumed rejection and calls Dr. Phreak, ready to assume his role as a “freak” like the others. Learning Jimmy contacted Dr. Phreak about his location, Jimmy's parents throw Dr. Phreak out of their car realizing he was a rude man.
When his parents pick him up, Jimmy and his father are sitting alone in the car.  His father regrets that Jimmy is giving up when he is so close. Jimmy's father then looks the other way while Jimmy escapes to finish his mission. With the help of Pappy's twin brother Pippy, Jimmy flies to the wedding. His mother tries to stop him from taking off, but the cult, the “freaks” and Slim's gang collide in helping Jimmy and stop her. It's revealed that Slim and Jimmy's mother knew each other in the past as she's the "Wildfire" he kept mentioning. Like Pappy, Pippy apparently dies at the wheel, and Jimmy ends up falling out of the plane and over Niagara Falls, but survives.
Jimmy manages to escape the water and arrives just in time to stop the wedding.  He then removes his bubble suit, allowing him to touch and kiss the girl he loves for the first time. Jimmy then collapses and seemingly dies. Jimmy's mother then confesses that Jimmy had developed an immune system when he was four, revealing that he is not actually dead at all and is perfectly fine. Jimmy and Chloe then leave the church happily.
Finally, Jimmy and Chloe are married with all of Jimmy's new friends in attendance. Pushpop has become the new leader of the former cult who are apparently now followers of Hinduism.  Dr. Phreak has befriended his band of freaks, and Jimmy's mother has reunited with Slim and embraces a more rebellious lifestyle with both Slim and Morton. Pippy and Pappy, both of whom merely fell asleep instead of dying, are shown to be Jimmy and Chloe’s drivers, having reunited after a romantic dispute between a woman named Poonani. They drive off with Jimmy and Chloe to their honeymoon.


== Cast ==
Jake Gyllenhaal as Jimmy Livingston
Swoosie Kurtz as Mrs. Livingston aka “Wildfire”
Marley Shelton as Chloe
Danny Trejo as Slim
John Carroll Lynch as Morton Livingston
Verne Troyer as Dr. Phreak
Dave Sheridan as Mark
Brian George as Pushpop
Patrick Cranshaw as Pappy/Pippy
Ever Carradine as Lisa
Beetlejuice as Lil' Zip
Fabio Lanzoni as Gil
Zach Galifianakis as Bus Stop Man
Arden Myrin as Lorraine
Pablo Schreiber as Todd
Matthew McGrory as Human Sasquatch/Clark
Stacy Keibler as Working Girl


== Reception ==
The film opened #13 at the U.S. Box office, taking in US$2,038,349 in its opening weekend.On Rotten Tomatoes it has an approval rating of 31% based on 84 reviews, with an average rating of 3.76/10. The site's consensus states that "Bubble Boy bounces along with lame, offensive jokes that are more tasteless than funny." On Metacritic it has a score of 41% based on reviews from 21 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
The film has been considered a "cult comedy."


== Production ==
Filming began November 24, 2000 and wrapped on March 7th 2001. The entire film was shot primarily in LA and Las Vegas. In the DVD commentary, director Blair Hayes and Jake Gyllenhaal have an argument around the time when Jimmy gets the scooter in Las Vegas, and the sound of (probably fake) fighting can be heard. Later in the commentary, Gyllenhaal leaves briefly and receives high praise from Hayes, relating him to Buster Keaton.


== Musical adaptation ==

In 2013, Cinco Paul and Ken Daurio adapted Bubble Boy into a stage musical featuring original songs, for which an original cast recording was released on Ghostlight Records in 2017 featuring A.J. Holmes, Alice Ripley and Richard Kind, produced by Paul, Justin Goldner & Kurt Deutsch.


== References ==


== External links ==
Bubble Boy at IMDb
Bubble Boy at Rotten Tomatoes
Bubble Boy at Box Office Mojo