Carrie Pilby is a 2016 American comedy-drama film directed by Susan Johnson and written by Kara Holden and Dean Craig, based on the best-selling novel of the same name by Caren Lissner. The film stars Bel Powley, Nathan Lane, Gabriel Byrne, Jason Ritter, William Moseley, Vanessa Bayer, and Colin O'Donoghue. Principal photography began on December 14, 2015, in New York City.
It was screened in the Special Presentations section at the 2016 Toronto International Film Festival. The film was given a limited release on March 31, 2017, before being released through video on demand on April 4, 2017, by The Orchard. It debuted on Netflix on September 5, 2017.


== Plot ==
Carrie Pilby is a 19-year-old child prodigy living alone in New York City. After attending Harvard University, she has spent the following years largely hiding in her apartment and visiting Dr. Petrov, a therapist and a close friend of her absent father. Dr. Petrov decides to write Carrie a to-do list of tasks in order for her to become more comfortable with social interaction. The list includes making a friend, getting a job, have a pet to take care of, and going on a date. As Carrie starts to fulfill the list, her views on sex, romance and the world begin to change her judgment on relationships and humanity.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
On June 17, 2013, it was announced that Braveart Films' producer Susan Johnson would make her directorial debut with the adaptation of the coming-of-age novel Carrie Pilby written by Caren Lissner, and the film would be produced by Suzanne Farwell and Susan Cartsonis of Storefront Pictures. Hailee Steinfeld was previously attached to play the titular role in the film, whose script was written by Kara Holden and Dean Craig. Steinfeld dropped out due to scheduling conflicts and was replaced by Bel Powley. Articles about the film noted its largely female production team, female head writer and female director.
Principal photography on the film began on December 14, 2015, in New York City.


== Release ==
The film had its world premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 9, 2016. In November 2016, The Orchard acquired US distribution rights to the film. The film was given limited release on March 31, 2017, in six theaters, and then became available through video on demand on April 4, 2017. The film was the most-watched iTunes film in the independent films category for the first three weeks of its release, then held third place during the fourth week.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Carrie Pilby at IMDb
Carrie Pilby at Rotten Tomatoes