Chloe is a 2009 erotic thriller film directed by Atom Egoyan, a remake of the 2003 French film Nathalie.... It stars Julianne Moore, Liam Neeson, and Amanda Seyfried in the titular role. Its screenplay was written by Erin Cressida Wilson, based on the earlier French film, written by Anne Fontaine.
The film received mixed reviews from critics. It grossed more at the box office than any of Egoyan's previous films.


== Plot ==
In a voice-over, Chloe discusses her business as a call girl. Catherine is a gynecologist, and her husband David is a college professor. Catherine suspects David of having an affair after she sees a cell-phone picture of him with a female student.
Catherine and David meet Catherine's colleague at a restaurant, where Catherine briefly encounters Chloe in the ladies room. Later that evening, while observing Chloe with her date, she realizes that she is a call girl.  At some point after, from her office window, Catherine notices Chloe enter into an upscale bar and surmises that she goes there to meet clients. Catherine goes there looking for Chloe, telling her that she wants to hire her to test David's loyalty. Chloe later tells Catherine that David asked her if he could kiss her, which he did. Catherine is angered but insists that Chloe meet with David again. She asks that Chloe show her the results of her most recent tests for sexually transmitted diseases. Chloe brings the test results to Catherine's office. While there, she meets Catherine's son, Michael, who is there to pick up a tuxedo. They chat briefly and Chloe flirts with him.
Over the next few days, Catherine and Chloe meet multiple times, and Chloe describes in explicit detail her encounters with David, which arouses Catherine. During one meeting,  Chloe kisses Catherine. Catherine, surprised by this, abruptly leaves. Later, when meeting with David at a get-together, she is taken aback by his awareness of the scent of her lotion; it is the same lotion that Chloe wears. Upset by this, Catherine leaves and meets with Chloe at a hotel. The two go into a hotel room, where Catherine starts undressing Chloe before asking Chloe to tell her how David touches her, visibly aroused. Realizing that Catherine wants her, Chloe seduces Catherine, undresses her and dominates her, having sex with her. Afterwards, Catherine arrives home later than usual, leading David to ask her if she has been unfaithful. Catherine tells him she thinks he has been unfaithful as well, and the two argue, stopping after being interrupted by Michael.
Catherine meets with Chloe and calls off their relationship, but later asks her to meet her at a coffee house frequented by David. She has also asked David to meet there to discuss their relationship. David arrives first and she angrily demands that he admit that he is having an affair, insisting that they both should confess their indiscretions and "lay everything out on the table." Chloe walks in, and it is very clear that David does not recognize her, appearing as if he has never even met her before. Chloe leaves quickly, and Catherine realizes that Chloe made up the stories of her encounters with David.
David admits that he has fantasized about other women, and expects Catherine to make a similar admission with regard to men. When she does not, David becomes agitated. Catherine then tells David that she hired Chloe, and that the two of them also had a sexual encounter. She apologizes, saying that she felt she had became invisible to David as she aged, while David became more attractive to her, and that this got in the way of their sex life. The couple reconciles.
Chloe goes to Catherine and David's house and seduces Michael before having sex with him in Catherine's bed. Catherine arrives home, and Chloe tells Catherine that she is in love with her. She threatens to hurt Catherine with her hairpin, requesting a kiss, and Catherine complies. Michael sees, startling Catherine and causing her to push Chloe into the bedroom window. Chloe manages to grab hold of the frame, but she intentionally lets go and falls to her death. Sometime later, Catherine attends Michael's graduation party and wears Chloe's hairpin in her hair.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
Chloe was the first film produced by the director Atom Egoyan which was not written by himself.
The entire film production time was only 37 days.The film was financed solely in France and was shot in Toronto and Lake Ontario, Canada. Some local restaurants and scenic spots appear in the film under actual names, such as Allan Gardens, Cafe Diplomatico, The Rivoli, the Windsor Arms Hotel, the Royal York Hotel, the Royal Ontario Museum, The Royal Conservatory of Music, the CN Tower, the Art Gallery of Ontario and the Ontario College of Art.Producer Jason Reitman helped persuade Amanda Seyfried to star in this film. Seyfried accepted the role of Chloe after a friend of hers withdrew from consideration due to discomfort with the nudity. Julianne Moore described Seyfried as a "very dependable" acting partner and claimed that they were largely comfortable with the intimacy in the film. In describing her view of Catherine's relationship with Chloe, Moore noted "an emotional quality to their intimacy that has to do with their conversation and their basic receptivity to one another. Now what they turn into personally obviously is very different. They are having completely subjective experiences, but that doesn't mean [they're] not incredibly receptive to one another and it clearly creates something in-between them. And that's what love and sex and intimacy and all that is. Someone who is listening to you, hearing you, there for you, that's the person you end up having a relationship with, sexual or just emotional or whatever. I don't know if that has to do with gender necessarily".Liam Neeson's wife, Natasha Richardson, had a skiing accident during filming. Neeson decided to leave the set to take care of his wife, who died from her injury a few days later. The filmmakers re-arranged the shooting schedule accordingly for Neeson's absence. Just a few days after his wife's death, Neeson returned to the set and filmed the remainder of his scenes in two days.
Canadian indie rock band Raised by Swans has two songs featured in the movie and the band is mentioned several times by Chloe.
Anne Fontaine (the writer/director of Nathalie...) said that she was interested in Egoyan's take on it. Fontaine also said that she was not happy with Nathalie... because the two lead actresses of the film objected to her original intention for a lesbian relationship to develop between their characters.Atom Egoyan studied at the University of Toronto, and Joe Medjuck, one of the film's producers, was a teacher of Egoyan at the University of Toronto.


== Behind the scenes ==


=== Creative process ===
After determining the plan for the remake of the film Nathalie..., the investor StudioCanal believed that it was necessary to find a reliable screenwriter to write a script for the film because it tells a relatively complicated family and emotional story. Erin Cressida Wilson was chosen, in part because of her experience writing erotic films such as Secretary (2002). This script took Wilson a lot of time and energy to create, and many times she couldn't figure out what real life was and what was the story in the script. Wilson found it easier to write for Chloe than for Catherine, later saying, "I related to Chloe, the young woman who loved to seduce people".


=== Making photography ===
Chloe's director Atom Egoyan insists on using 35 mm film to shoot the film. This is undoubtedly a time-consuming and labor-intensive process, but Atom Egoyan enjoys it. The photographer Paul Sarossy thinks filming this film is obviously symbolic. In this digital age, choosing to use film to shoot a movie is more of a feeling of escape from digital electronics. Although the film eventually uses some digital technology, it is not a digitally produced film.


=== Costume design ===
The film also took great pains in the art design and costume design. In the movie, mirrors and glass were used as props for reflection and refraction. The costume design of the film also pays attention to the concept of mirroring. In order to complement the artwork, costume designer Debra Hanson specifically used a layered mirror effect on the costume design. Those repeated laces, structures and decorations are also mirrored images. The effect is the same as showing the heart of a character. In addition, the relationship between clothing and the external environment has also been deliberately taken care of. In the film, Chloe's scene in the greenhouse was decorated with a lot of leaves and patterns on the clothes she wore, which could reflect some of her inner unrest. Similarly, Catherine's clothes are in part echoed by Chloe's clothing, and their relationship in the film is complex and subtle.


== Financing and distribution ==
StudioCanal fully financed Chloe, and StudioCanal were able to fully recoup the film's budget via international pre-sales. In 2009, the film received award nominations from London Film Festival, San Sebastián International Film Festival, and Toronto International Film Festival under the category of Film Presented.Sony Pictures Worldwide Acquisitions Group paid a low seven-figure sum to acquire the United States distribution rights of Chloe, and the group opened this film in limited theatrical release in the United States on March 26, 2010 through Sony Pictures Classics. In the United States, this film grossed $3 million theatrically, which is generally considered as a good result for an arthouse film release in early 2010's.In the wake of Chloe, Egoyan had since received many scripts of erotic thrillers. Amanda Seyfried's performance in this film also helped her to gain industry acclaim and become considered for more roles.


=== Home media ===
Chloe was released in the United States on July 13, 2010 in both DVD and Blu-ray Disc. The disc includes an audio commentary, making-of featurette, and deleted scenes.  The film did especially well in Home Video rentals; for instance, the film stayed in Redbox Top 10 DVD rentals chart for three straight weeks (very good result for an arthouse release in the United States).Several months following the DVD and Blu-ray release of Chloe, Egoyan said that Chloe had made more money than any of his previous films.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 51% based on 163 reviews, with an average rating of 5.71/10. The site's consensus is that "Despite its promising pedigree and a titillating premise, Chloe ultimately fails to deliver the heat—or the thrills—expected of a sexual thriller." Metacritic, which assigns a score from major reviewers, gave the film a 48 out of 100, based on 33 reviews, indicating "Mixed or average reviews."Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film 3.5 out of 4 and wrote: "It's not the kind of movie that depends on the certainty of an ending. It's more about how things continue." 
Todd McCarthy of Variety gave the film a mixed review: "Sexual suspicion and game-playing spiral down from the exotically intriguing to outright silliness in Chloe."
Anthony Lane of The New Yorker compared the film to the French original: "The movie--directed by Atom Egoyan, who should know better--is closely adapted from Nathalie..., a French film of 2004, with Gérard Depardieu and Emmanuelle Béart, but what seemed like standard practice for Parisians comes across here as unsmiling porno-farce.


=== Accolades ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Chloe at IMDb
Chloe at AllMovie
Chloe at Box Office Mojo
StudioCanal (fr) Chloe