Cinderella III: A Twist in Time (released in UK as Cinderella: A Twist in Time) is a 2007 American direct-to-video fantasy adventure film. It is directed by Frank Nissen and features a screenplay by Dan Berendsen, Margaret Heidenry, Colleen Ventimilia, and Eddie Guzelian. It is the second direct-to-video sequel to the 1950 Walt Disney Pictures animated film Cinderella and third and final installment in the Cinderella trilogy. The film features the voices of Jennifer Hale and Susanne Blakeslee as Cinderella and Lady Tremaine respectively. It made its world television premiere on Toon Disney on December 3, 2007.


== Plot ==
Cinderella and the Prince are having a picnic the Fairy Godmother, Jaq and Gus have prepared for them to celebrate their one-year anniversary. Meanwhile, at the Tremaine mansion, Cinderella's stepsisters Anastasia and Drizella are bitterly doing Cinderella's old chores. Anastasia wanders off to avoid work and stumbles upon the picnic, discovering magic was what helped Cinderella. The Fairy Godmother inadvertently drops her wand and Anastasia takes it to her mother, but she and Drizella doesn't believe her. When the Fairy Godmother attempts to take it back, Anastasia accidentally turns her into a statue.
Lady Tremaine, reveling at a chance to restore her own fortunes at Cinderella's expense, uses the wand to go back in time to the day the Grand Duke fitted the glass slipper on Cinderella. She uses the wand to expand the slipper so that it fits Anastasia, and the Grand Duke declares she must be the girl the Prince is looking for. Cinderella arrives on the scene too late, and Lady Tremaine destroys Cinderella's other slipper – the only proof that she was the girl who danced with the Prince on the night of the ball. With motivation from Jaq and Gus, and determined to set things right, Cinderella follows her stepfamily to the palace with Jaq and Gus.
At first the Prince claims Anastasia is not the girl he danced with at the ball, but Lady Tremaine uses the wand to alter his memory, and he accepts Anastasia as his fiancée. Jaq and Gus witness this and inform Cinderella that Lady Tremaine has the Fairy Godmother's wand. The King is delighted with Anastasia in spite of her clumsy antics, and gives her a seashell that once belonged to his late wife. Meanwhile, the Prince begins to realize that he does not feel love for Anastasia despite Lady Tremaine's spell.
Sneaking into the Tremaines' room disguised as a palace maid, Cinderella and the mice manage to steal back the wand, but Cinderella is captured by the palace guards before she can use it. Cinderella briefly touches the Prince's hand as she is taken away, and he begins to recognize her. Lady Tremaine orders Cinderella exiled from the kingdom by ship. Jaq and Gus find the Prince and explain the whole story to him; Cinderella's bluebirds then arrive with the repaired other slipper as proof. The Prince intercepts the ship before it leaves and embraces Cinderella; his true memories return, and she accepts his marriage proposal.
The Prince brings Cinderella back to the palace and explains everything to the King and the Grand Duke. The King orders the Tremaine family's arrest, but they escape using the wand. As Cinderella prepares for her wedding, Lady Tremaine returns with Anastasia, who has been magically transformed into a doppelgänger of Cinderella. She also creates a twisted version of the pumpkin carriage with her cat Lucifer as coachman, and traps Cinderella in it. Jaq and Gus intervene, and they all defeat Lucifer and escape before the carriage is driven off a cliff, riding back on the carriage's horse.
Cinderella makes it back to the wedding, only to discover that Anastasia, wanting true love of her own and unwilling to take away true love from the prince, has refused to go through with the marriage. An enraged Lady Tremaine appears with Drizella, and the king orders her arrest. Lady Tremaine transforms the guards into various animals as they pursue her, and is about to turn Anastasia into a toad when Cinderella and the Prince step in to protect her. The Prince's sword deflects the spell, turning Lady Tremaine and Drizella to toads instead.
Anastasia uses the wand to return to normal, and offers the seashell back to the king, feeling she does not deserve it. The King, asserting that everyone deserves a chance at love, allows her to keep it. Cinderella and Anastasia reconcile, and together restore the Fairy Godmother. She considers undoing Lady Tremaine's change of events, but sees that Cinderella and the Prince's love has grown stronger thanks to the adventure, and decides to let them continue as they are.
In the credits, Anastasia is now living in the palace with Cinderella and has reunited with the Baker from Cinderella II, and a mid-credits scene, Drizella and Lady Tremaine are placed in the cellar and restored to their human forms, but are both now dressed in Cinderella's old rags, much to their horror.


== Production ==
This film was Disney Australia's final feature (the studio was closed and equipment auctioned off once Cinderella III production completed in July 2006). Cinderella III: A Twist in Time was additional production services Toon City Animation, Inc., Manila, Philippines.


== Cast ==
Jennifer Hale as Cinderella. Ian Harrowell served as the supervising animator for Cinderella.
Christopher Daniel Barnes (credited as "C.D. Barnes") as Prince Charming. Robert Mason served as the supervising animator for Prince Charming.
Susan Blakeslee as Lady Tremaine
Tress MacNeille as Anastasia Tremaine. Lily Dell served as the supervising animator for Anastasia.
Russi Taylor as Drizella Tremaine and The Fairy Godmother
Andre Stojka as the King
Holland Taylor as Prudence
Rob Paulsen as the Grand Duke and  Jaq the mouse. Bernard Derriman served as the supervising animator for Jaq.
Corey Burton as Gus the mouse. Bernard Derriman also served as the supervising animator for Gus.
Frank Welker as Lucifer, Lady Tremaine's cat.
Tami Tappan as Cinderella (singing voice)


== Music ==
All tracks are written by Alan Zachary and Michael Weiner.


== Release ==
Cinderella III: A Twist in Time was released on DVD on February 6, 2007. The film returned to the Disney Vault on January 31, 2008. The film was released on Blu-ray on November 20, 2012 in a two-movie collection with Cinderella II: Dreams Come True.
Features

Games and ActivitiesBibbidi-Bobbidi Game
Cinderella's Ballroom (DVD-ROM)

Music and More"I Still Believe" Music Video By: Hayden Panettiere

Backstage DisneyBackstage At Disney Cruise Line's "Twice Charmed"
First Look At The New DVD, "Disney Princess Enchanted Tales"


== Reception ==
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 75% based on eight reviews, with an average rating of 6.03/10. It was reviewed more positively compared to its predecessor, Cinderella II: Dreams Come True, which scored an 11% critical approval rating.Slate Magazine writer Dan Kois has used Cinderella III to defend the merits of Disney's straight-to-video sequels, after Disney announced production of any further sequels would cease.
Kois points out that in Cinderella III, the wicked stepsister (Anastasia)—originally an "oafish caricature"—finally becomes a fully fleshed-out character, and some of the absurdity of the original film is gently mocked.Many have noted numerous similarities between the film's premise and that of Twice Charmed: An Original Twist on the Cinderella Story, a Broadway-style stage musical created by Walt Disney Creative Entertainment that was running on the Disney Cruise Line as of 2007.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Cinderella 3 DVD Official Disney Website
Director Frank Nissen on Cinderella III: A Twist in Time
Cinderella III: A Twist in Time at The Big Cartoon DataBase
Cinderella III: A Twist in Time at IMDb