Coraline is a 2009 American stop-motion animated dark fantasy horror film written and directed by Henry Selick and based on Neil Gaiman's novella of the same name. Produced by Laika as its first feature film, it stars Dakota Fanning, Teri Hatcher, Jennifer Saunders, Dawn French, Keith David, John Hodgman, Robert Bailey Jr., and Ian McShane. The film depicts its titular protagonist finding an idealized parallel universe behind a small door in her new home, unaware that it contains a dark and sinister secret.
The film was released in United States theaters on February 6, 2009 by Focus Features after a world premiere at the Portland International Film Festival. It was met with widespread critical acclaim. The film made $16.85 million during opening weekend, ranking third at the box office, and by the end of its run had grossed over $124 million worldwide, making it the third highest-grossing stop-motion film of all time after Chicken Run and Wallace and Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit. The film won Annie Awards for Best Music in an Animated Feature Production, Best Character Design in an Animated Feature Production and Best Production Design in an Animated Feature Production, and received nominations for an Academy Award for Best Animated Feature and a Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film. In retrospective years, it has amassed a strong cult following.


== Plot ==
Coraline Jones and her parents, Mel and Charlie, move into an old mansion that has been divided up in to flats and is now known as the Pink Palace Apartments. Due to her parents struggling to complete their gardening catalog, Coraline is often ignored. Coraline meets the landlady's talkative grandson, Wyborne "Wybie" Lovat and a stray black cat who follows him around. Wybie later leaves Coraline a button-eyed rag doll he discovered in his grandmother's trunk that eerily resembles her. Soon after, Coraline discovers a small door in the living room that is bricked up and can only be unlocked with a key that has a button-shaped motif.
During the night, Coraline is awaken by a mouse, who guides her through the door, now a portal to a seemingly more lively version of the house. Coraline meets her Other Mother and Father, button-eyed doppelgängers of her parents that appear more attentive and caring than her actual parents. After having dinner with them, she goes to bed and awakens back in the real world. Wybie tells Coraline about his grandmother's twin sister who disappeared in the house as a child. Coraline's neighbors, Sergei Alexander Bobinsky, an eccentric Chernobyl liquidator-turned gymnast who owns a mouse circus, and retired burlesque actresses April Spink and Miriam Forcible, cryptically warn her about the door and of imminent danger.
Coraline visits the Other World for a second and third time; where each time, accompanied by the mute Other Wybie, she is entertained by the Other Bobinsky's mouse circus and the Other Spink and Forcible. Coraline also encounters the cat, who has the ablities to speak in the Other World and traverse between the two dimensions. The Other Mother soon offers Coraline to stay in the Other World permanently on the condition of having buttons sewn over her eyes. A horrified Coraline rejects the offer and goes to bed, but when she wakes up, she finds she is still in the Other World. When Coraline demands to return home, the Other Mother transforms into a more menacing version of herself and imprisons Coraline in a room behind a mirror. There, Coraline meets the ghosts of the Other Mother's previous child victims, including Wybie's great aunt, who reveal that the Other Mother, whom they call the "Beldam", used the same doll Coraline had, each time designed after the child in question, to spy on them, take advantage of their unhappiness and lure them into her dimension. When they accepted the Beldam's offer of having buttons sewn over their eyes, she trapped their souls. After Coraline promises to free their souls, the Other Wybie helps her escape back to the real world.
Coraline finds her parents missing, eventually realizing that they have been kidnapped by the Beldam. She looks for advice and approaches Spink and Forcible. After being given Spink's lucky adder stone, Coraline soon returns to the Other World accompanied by the cat, where she proposes a game to the Beldam: if she can find the ghost children's souls and her parents, they will all go free, if not, she will finally accept the Beldam's offer. Coraline ventures into the now-hostile Other World using the stone to find the ghost children's souls; hidden as objects belonging to the dimension's inhabitants and with each one she collects, parts of the Other World disintegrate until only the living room remains. Coraline then encounters the Beldam in her true form, a humanoid arachnid with needle-like fingers on her hands. One of the ghost children warn her that even if she succeeds, the Beldam will never let her go. Using this advice, Coraline tricks the Beldam into unlocking the door and, upon finding her parents trapped in a snow globe, creates a diversion by throwing the cat at her. Coraline grabs the snow globe, narrowly escapes through the door with the Beldam in pursuit, and manages to close and lock it with the help of the ghost children, severing the Beldam's right hand in the process.
Coraline's parents reappear in the real world without any memory of what happened to them. That night, the ghost children appear in Coraline's dream to thank her for freeing their souls, but warn her that the Beldam, as long as she is still alive, will never stop looking for the key. Coraline decides to drop it down an old well near her home, but before she does, the Beldam's severed hand attacks her. Wybie arrives and, after a struggle, destroys the hand by dropping a large rock on it. Coraline and Wybie then throw the key and the hand's remnants into the well and seal it shut.
Soon after, Coraline and her parents, who have finally finished their catalog, host a garden party for their neighbors. Wybie introduces his grandmother and Coraline prepares to tell her story. The cat is last seen walking behind the Pink Palace signpost before disappearing.


== Voice cast ==
Dakota Fanning as Coraline Jones, a curious 11-year-old girl.
Teri Hatcher as Mel Jones, Coraline's mother, and the Beldam, also known as the Other Mother, an evil sorceress and the ruler of the Other World.
Jennifer Saunders and Dawn French as April Spink and Miriam Forcible, respectively, a pair of retired burlesque actresses.
Keith David as The Cat, a sarcastic, mysterious, nameless black cat who has the abilities to traverse between the real world and the Other World and speak in the latter.
John Hodgman as Charlie Jones, Coraline's father, and the Other Father.
John Linnell provides the Other Father's singing voice.
Robert Bailey Jr. as Wyborne "Wybie" Lovat, the geeky, nervous 11-year-old grandson of Coraline's landlady. Wybie was an original character created for the film to make Coraline's character appear more social to the audience.
Ian McShane as Sergei Alexander Bobinsky, nicknamed "Mr. B," an eccentric Chernobyl liquidator-turned gymnast who owns a mouse circus.
Carolyn Crawford as Mrs. Lovat, Wybie's grandmother and the owner of the Pink Palace Apartments.
Aankha Neal, George Selick, and Hannah Kaiser as the Ghost Children, the Beldam's previous victims, one of them being Mrs. Lovat's twin sister and Wybie's great-aunt.
Marina Budovsky and Harry Selick as Coraline's friends back home in Michigan who appear in a picture frame in the Other World.
Emerson Tenney as the dragonflies in the Other World.


== Production ==

Director Henry Selick met author Neil Gaiman just as Gaiman was finishing the novel Coraline, and given that Gaiman was a fan of Selick's The Nightmare Before Christmas, he invited him to make a possible film adaptation. As Selick thought a direct adaptation would lead to "maybe a 47-minute movie", his screenplay had some expansions, such as the creation of Wybie. When looking for a design away from that of most animation, Selick discovered the work of Japanese illustrator Tadahiro Uesugi and invited him to become the concept artist. One of Uesugi's biggest influences was on the color palette, which was muted in reality and more colorful in the Other World, similar to The Wizard of Oz. Uesugi declared that "at the beginning, it was supposed to be a small project over a few weeks to simply create characters; however, I ended up working on the project for over a year, eventually designing sets and backgrounds, on top of drawing the basic images for the story to be built upon."Coraline was staged in a 140,000-square-foot (13,000 m2) warehouse in Hillsboro, Oregon. The stage was divided into 50 lots, which played host to nearly 150 sets. Among the sets were three miniature Victorian mansions, a 42-foot (12.8 m) apple orchard, and a model of Ashland, Oregon, including tiny details such as banners for the Oregon Shakespeare Festival. More than 28 animators worked at a time on rehearsing or shooting scenes, producing 90–100 seconds of finished animation each week. To capture stereoscopy for the 3D release, the animators shot each frame from two slightly apart camera positions.Every object on screen was made for the film. The crew used three 3D printing systems from Objet in the development and production of the film. Thousands of high-quality 3D models, ranging from facial expressions to doorknobs, were printed in 3D using the Polyjet matrix systems, which enable the fast transformation of CAD (computer-aided design) drawings into high-quality 3D models. The puppets had separate parts for the upper and lower parts of the head that could be exchanged for different facial expressions, and the characters of Coraline could potentially exhibit over 208,000 facial expressions.
Computer artists composited separately-shot elements together, or added elements of their own, which had to look handcrafted instead of computer-generated – for instance, the flames were done with traditional animation and painted digitally, and the fog was dry ice.At its peak, the film involved the efforts of 450 people, including from 30 to 35 animators and digital designers in the Digital Design Group (DDG), directed by Dan Casey, and more than 250 technicians and designers. One crew member, Althea Crome,  was hired specifically to knit miniature sweaters and other clothing for the puppet characters, sometimes using knitting needles as thin as human hair. The clothes also simulated wear using paint and a file.


== Soundtrack ==
The soundtrack for Coraline features songs in French composer Bruno Coulais, with one, "Other Father Song", by They Might Be Giants. The Other Father's singing voice is provided by John Linnell, one of the singers from the band. They had initially written 10 songs for the film; when a melancholy tone was decided, all but one were cut. Coulais' score was performed by the Hungarian Symphony Orchestra and features choral pieces sung by the Children's Choir of Nice in a nonsense language. Selick mentions that the main soloist, "a young girl you hear singing in several parts of the film," is coincidentally named Coraline. Coraline won Coulais the 2009 Annie Award for best score for an animated feature.

Soundtrack list"Sirens of the Sea" – Performed by Michele Mariana
"Other Father Song" – Written and performed by John Linnell
"Nellie Jean" – Performed by Kent Melton
"Dreaming" – Performed by Bruno Coulais, The Children's Choir of Nice, and Teri Hatcher


== Release ==
Coraline was theatrically released on February 6, 2009.


=== Home media ===
The film was released on DVD and Blu-ray in the United States on July 21, 2009, by Universal Studios Home Entertainment. A 3-D version comes with four sets of 3-D glasses—specifically the green-magenta anaglyph image. Coraline was released on DVD and Blu-ray in the United Kingdom on October 12, 2009. A 3-D version of the film was also released on a 2-Disc Collector's Edition. The DVD opened to first week sales of 1,036,845 and over $19 million in revenue. Total sales stand at over 2.6 million units and over $45 million in revenue. A two-disc Blu-ray 3D set, which includes a stereoscopic 3D on the first disc and an anaglyph 3D image, was released in 2011, a new edition from Shout! Factory under license from Universal will be released in the near future.


=== Other media ===
The website for Coraline involves an interactive exploration game where the player can scroll through Coraline's world. It won the 2009 Webby Award for "Best Use of Animation or Motion Graphics", both by the people and the Webby organization. It was also nominated for the Webby "Movie and Film" category. On June 16, 2008, D3 Publisher announced the release of a video game based on the film. It was developed by Papaya Studio for the Wii and PlayStation 2 and by Art Co. for Nintendo DS. It was released on January 27, 2009, close to the film's theatrical release. The soundtrack was released digitally February 3, 2009, by E1 Music, and in stores on February 24, 2009.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
According to Paul Dergarabedian, a film business analyst with Media by Numbers, for the film to succeed it needed a box office comparable to Wallace & Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit, which had grossed $16 million its opening weekend and ended up making more than $192 million worldwide; prior to the film's release, Dergarabedian thought Laika Studios "should be really pleased" were Coraline to make $10 million in its opening weekend. In its US opening weekend, the film grossed $16.85 million, ranking third at the box office. It made $15 million during its second weekend, bringing its U.S. total up to $35.6 million, $25.5 million of which came from 3D presentations. As of November 2009, the film has grossed $75,286,229 in the United States and Canada and $49,310,169 in other territories, for a total of $124,596,398 worldwide.


=== Critical response ===
The film was widely acclaimed on release. On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 90% based on 269 reviews, with an average rating of 7.80/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "With its vivid stop-motion animation combined with Neil Gaiman's imaginative story, Coraline is a film that's both visually stunning and wondrously entertaining." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 80 out of 100, based on 38 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".David Edelstein said the film is "a bona fide fairy tale" that needed a "touch less entrancement and a touch more ... story." A. O. Scott of The New York Times called the film "exquisitely realized," with a "slower pace and a more contemplative tone than the novel. It is certainly exciting, but rather than race through ever noisier set pieces toward a hectic climax in the manner of so much animation aimed at kids, Coraline lingers in an atmosphere that is creepy, wonderfully strange and full of feeling."


=== Accolades ===


== See also ==
List of ghost films


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Coraline at IMDb
Coraline at The Big Cartoon DataBase
Coraline at AllMovie
Coraline at Rotten Tomatoes
Coraline at Metacritic
Coraline at Box Office Mojo
Coraline script at the Internet Movie Script Database