Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles (also known as Crocodile Dundee III) is a 2001 action comedy film directed by Simon Wincer and starring Paul Hogan. It is the sequel to Crocodile Dundee II (1988) and the third and final film of the Crocodile Dundee series. Hogan and Linda Kozlowski reprise their roles as Michael "Crocodile" Dundee and Sue Charlton, respectively. The film was shot on location in Los Angeles and in Queensland. Actor Paul Hogan reported that the inspiration for the storyline came during a tour of Litomyšl, Czech Republic in 1993.


== Plot ==
Michael "Crocodile" Dundee (Paul Hogan) is living in the Australian outback with Sue Charlton (Linda Kozlowski) and their young son Mikey (Serge Cockburn). Crocodile hunting has been made illegal, and Mick is reduced to wrestling crocodiles for the entertainment of tourists. He has a rival in the business, another outback survivalist named Jacko (Alec Wilson).  When an opportunity arises for Sue to become the Los Angeles bureau chief of a newspaper owned by her father, Mick and his family cross the Pacific to California.
In the United States, both Mick and his son have encounters with the locals, causing cross-cultural mishaps. Mick becomes an undercover amateur sleuth, helping to probe the mysterious death of his wife's predecessor at the newspaper, while Mikey attends a local school, where he quickly impresses his classmates and teacher with his outback survival skills. Because the case takes up so much of their time, Mick and Sue eventually call in Jacko to babysit their son; immediately, Jacko and Mikey's teacher become interested in each other.
It is revealed that the dead reporter had been investigating a film studio, which is about to make a sequel to the action film Lethal Agent, despite the title's commercial failure. Mick becomes suspicious when several paintings from Southern Europe are brought onto the set; although at first he suspects drug smuggling, the pictures themselves are revealed to be missing art from a museum in former Yugoslavia, thought lost in the recent civil wars. They are to appear in the film as mere props, to be publicly 'destroyed' in a scene in which they are set on fire, at which point they will have been exchanged for copies.
Attempting to secure one of the paintings as evidence, Mick, Sue, and Jacko run afoul of the studio director and his thugs. Using the studio's props and three lions used in filming to defeat the gangsters, Mick and Sue solve the case and return to Australia, where they are officially married.


== Cast ==
Paul Hogan as Michael "Crocodile" Dundee
Linda Kozlowski as Sue Charlton
Jere Burns as Arnan Rothman
Jonathan Banks as Miloš Drubnik
Alec Wilson as Jacko
Gerry Skilton as Nugget O'Cass
Steve Rackman as Donk
Serge Cockburn as Michael "Mikey" Dundee
Aida Turturro as Jean Ferraro
Paul Rodriguez as Diego
Kaitlin Hopkins as Miss Mathis
Mike Tyson as himself


== Reception ==
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has a score of 11% based on reviews from 80 critics. The site's consensus reads: "A sequel as unnecessary as it is belated, Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles lacks virtually all of the easygoing humor and charm that delighted fans of the original." On Metacritic the film has a score of 37% based on reviews from 33 critics, indicating generally unfavorable reviews.Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film 2 out of 4 and wrote: "It may not be brilliant, but who would you rather your kids took as a role model: Crocodile Dundee, David Spade or Tom Green?"Variety called it "Amiable rather than genuinely funny."
The film was nominated for a Razzie Award for Worst Remake or Sequel but lost to Planet of the Apes.


=== Box office ===
The film grossed $7,759,103 at the box office in Australia. The film debuted in 4th place at the US box office behind Bridget Jones's Diary (which was #1 in its second weekend), Spy Kids and Along Came a Spider. It grossed  $39 million worldwide, below the total gross of the previous two films.  In a 2017 interview, comedian and actor Tom Green stated that the box office receipts for his film Freddy Got Fingered did not reflect the actual attendance, as he thinks that movie goers under the age of seventeen bought tickets to Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles and snuck into the theater showing his film.


== References ==


== External links ==
Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles at IMDb
Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles at the TCM Movie Database
Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles at AllMovie
Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles at Box Office Mojo
Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles at Oz Movie