Daddy Day Care is a 2003 American family comedy film starring Eddie Murphy, Jeff Garlin, Steve Zahn, Regina King, and Anjelica Huston. Written by Geoff Rodkey and directed by Steve Carr, it marks Murphy and Carr's second collaboration after Dr. Dolittle 2 (2001). The plot follows two fathers who start a child day care out of their home after they are laid off from their corporate jobs.
The film was released in the United States on May 9, 2003, by Columbia Pictures. It received generally negative reviews from critics, and grossed $164 million worldwide on a budget of $60 million. The movie was followed by two sequels, in the film series of the same name.


== Plot ==
Marketing executive Charlie Hinton and his best friend, Phil Ryerson, find themselves fired when their boss, CEO Jim Fields, shuts down the company's entire health division due to children disliking new, healthy breakfast cereals made from vegetables. 
While his wife Kim supports the family by returning to work as a lawyer, Charlie, after six weeks of job hunting, is forced to take their young son Ben out of Chapman Academy - an expensive and over-academic preschool headed by Gwyneth Harridan. Unable to find a satisfactory alternative, Charlie opens a daycare center in his home with the help of Phil, calling it "Daddy Day Care". Although local parents are suspicious of men working with kids, a few choose their service as it's cheaper and more child-based.
Charlie and Phil open with a few children, struggling at first with chaos, and some personal issues. Angered at the competition, Harridan attempts to shut them down, notifying child services of the new daycare. Charlie and Phil find themselves rectifying problems pointed out by Dan Kubitz, a director of child services, to ensure their daycare is suitable for children, including hiring their former colleague Marvin as an additional care provider. 
In time, they slowly begin to enjoy running Daddy Day Care, which grows in popularity, and bonding with the kids, with Charlie delighted to see Ben enjoying himself. However, Harridan continues trying to shut them down after losing children to them. When Kubitz points out the house cannot accommodate the number of children they have, Charlie opts to find a new permanent facility somewhere in the city for the daycare rather than remove a few of the kids to keep it operating.
Marvin quickly mentions he knows of a building with potential, but they cannot afford it. They decide to hold a fundraising children's festival called "Rock for Daddy Day Care", to raise the necessary capital. However, Harridan learns of the event and sabotages it with help from her hesitant assistant Jennifer. At the same time, Jim offers Charlie and Phil their old jobs back at double their salaries, letting them run the whole health division. Harridan offers to take in their children for a cheaper price in exchange for Daddy Day Care shutting down. Charlie and Phil reluctantly accept the offer, leaving Marvin heartbroken and refusing to join them. The next day, at the marketing meeting for a cereal made from cotton candy, Charlie questions his decision, after he realizes the impact Daddy Day Care has had on Ben and the other children, and swiftly quits, leaving Jim and his executives dismayed.
Convincing Phil to quit and re-open Daddy Day Care, and informing Marvin of their plans, Charlie confronts Harridan during a student orientation with the daycare's children, and reveals to the parents in attendance how little she cares about their children. Realising how much Daddy Day Care changed and helped their children, the parents let them go back to Daddy Day Care. Six months later, the daycare manages to buy the building it needs to expand, and prospers, with Charlie and Phil successful, Jennifer now working for the center, and Marvin entering a relationship with one of the children's mothers. With Chapman forced out of business, Harridan is forced to work as a crossing guard, and inadvertently causes a traffic jam when a flower she receives from one of her former children, Crispin, causes her to be swarmed by bees, wasps, & hornets.


== Cast ==
Eddie Murphy as Charles "Charlie" Hinton
Jeff Garlin as Phillip "Phil" Ryerson
Steve Zahn as Marvin
Regina King as Kimberly "Kim" Hinton
Anjelica Huston as Miss Gwyneth Harridan
Khamani Griffin as Benjamin "Ben" Hinton
Kevin Nealon as Bruce
Jonathan Katz as  Daniel "Dan" Kubitz
Lacey Chabert as Jennifer "Jenny"
Max Burkholder as Maxwell "Max" Ryerson
Jimmy Bennett as Tony/Flash
Leila Arcieri as Kelli
Shane Baumel as Crispin
Elle Fanning as Jamie
Felix Achille as Dylan
Hailey Noelle Johnson as Becca
Siobhan Fallon Hogan as Peggy
Arthur Young as Nicky
Wallace Langham as Jim Fields
Lisa Edelstein as Bruce's wife/Crispin's mother
Mark Griffin as Steve
Laura Kightlinger as Sheila
Steven Anthony Lawrence as Stupid Edward KeezerCheap Trick appear as themselves at the Rock for Daddy Day Care charity event.


== Production ==
In April 2002, The Hollywood Reporter reported Eddie Murphy was to reteam with Steve Carr, who directed Dr. Dolittle 2, on Daddy Day Care. In June 2002, Anjelica Huston was in negotiations to join the cast. The following month, Revolution Studios set Jeff Garlin, as well as Steve Zahn, to join Murphy in the film. Shooting began on August 1, 2002 in Los Angeles, California.Production was started on August 5, 2002, and wrapped on November 22, 2002. In December 2002, the film's poster was officially released, with the tagline, D-Day is coming.


== Release ==


=== Critical reception ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 27% based on 131 reviews, with an average rating of 4.51/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Daddy Day Care does its job of babysitting the tots. Anyone older will probably be bored." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 39 out of 100, based on 31 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews." Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale.Todd McCarthy from Variety called it "Scarcely more amusing than spending ninety minutes in a pre K classroom" and a "comically undernourished junk food snack".


=== Box office ===
Despite the negative critical ratings, the film was a box office success, grossing over $160 million worldwide based on a $60 million budget. The film was released in the United Kingdom on July 11, 2003, and opened at #3, behind Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle and Bruce Almighty. The next two weekends, the film moved down one place, before finally ending up at No. 10 on August 1.


== Sequels ==

In August 2003, soon after the release of Daddy Day Care, Murphy was rumored to be involved in a sequel film, although he had not signed up for one. A sequel was released on August 8, 2007, titled Daddy Day Camp, with Cuba Gooding, Jr. replacing Murphy as Charlie Hinton and Sony once again distributes the film (this time under TriStar). The film was panned by critics, with a 1% rating on Rotten Tomatoes. It won the Razzie Award for "Worst Prequel or Sequel."


== References ==


== External links ==
Daddy Day Care at IMDb
Daddy Day Care at Box Office Mojo
Daddy Day Care at Rotten Tomatoes
Daddy Day Care at Metacritic