Deuces Wild is a 2002 American crime drama film directed by Scott Kalvert and written by Paul Kimatian and Christopher Gambale, who also created the story. It stars Stephen Dorff, Brad Renfro, James Franco, Matt Dillon, and Fairuza Balk, among others. The film is set in 1958 Brooklyn, New York City. Martin Scorsese was originally the executive producer (as a favor to Paul Kimatian), but he eventually removed his name from this film. It was the final film of cinematographer John A. Alonzo before his death in 2001.


== Plot ==
Leon and Bobby are brothers and members of the Deuces, a Brooklyn street gang. Ever since the death of their other brother Alphonse "Allie Boy" from a drug overdose at the hands of Marco, they keep drugs off their block. This puts them in opposition to the Vipers, another local gang headed by Marco, who want to sell drugs in the neighborhood. On the eve of Marco's return from a three-year stint in prison, a gang war seems imminent. Marco plans revenge against Leon, whom he believes ratted him out to the police.
Bobby falls for a new girl who moves in across the street, Annie, the younger sister of Jimmy "Pockets", a Vipers member and heroin dealer. Their attraction for each other complicates the gang rivalry. Marco attacks the block and Bobby before beating and raping Betsy (Leon's girlfriend) in order to push him over the edge. After a series of skirmishes between the Vipers and Deuces, neighborhood Mafioso Fritzy orders Leon and Marco to make amends hours before the climactic rumble (he previously declined Marco's request to kill Leon). Leon disobeys this order in a fight at the docks where Marco is killed along with Jimmy Pockets, leaving Bobby and Annie free to take her mother to Los Angeles. Leon is shot and killed by one of Fritzy's men in retaliation for ignoring his orders. Before leaving, Bobby drops a wheelbarrow full of cinder blocks on Fritzy's car, presumably killing him.


== Cast ==
Stephen Dorff as Leon
Brad Renfro as Bobby
Fairuza Balk as Annie
Vincent Pastore as Father Aldo
Frankie Muniz as Scooch
Balthazar Getty as Jimmy "Pockets"
Matt Dillon as Fritzy
Norman Reedus as Marco
Max Perlich as Freddie
Drea de Matteo as Betsy
Louis Lombardi as Philly Babe
Deborah Harry as Wendy
James Franco as Tino Verona
Josh Leonard as Punchy
Johnny Knoxville as Vinnie Fish
George Georgiadis as Willie
Jackie Tohn as Mary Ann


== Reception ==
The film received negative reviews and currently holds a 3% rating on Rotten Tomatoes.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Deuces Wild at IMDb
Deuces Wild at AllMovie
Deuces Wild at Box Office Mojo
Deuces Wild at Rotten Tomatoes