Diary of a Wimpy Kid is a 2010 American live-action/animated comedy film directed by Thor Freudenthal and based on Jeff Kinney's 2007 book of the same name. The film stars Zachary Gordon and Robert Capron. Devon Bostick, Rachael Harris, Steve Zahn, and Chloë Grace Moretz also have prominent roles. It is the first installment in the Diary of a Wimpy Kid film series, and was followed by three sequels, Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Rodrick Rules (2011), Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Dog Days (2012), and Diary of a Wimpy Kid: The Long Haul (2017).The film was theatrically released on March 19, 2010, in the United States by 20th Century Fox. The film received mixed reviews from critics and earned $75.7 million on a $15 million budget. It was the only film in the series to be directed by Freudenthal, who was replaced by David Bowers for the rest of the installments.


== Plot ==
11-year-old Greg Heffley is apprehensive about beginning Westmore Middle School. On the first day, he quickly discovers the ups and downs, such as the missing stall doors in the boys' bathroom and the difficulties of obtaining a seat during lunch. During P.E. class, Greg and his best friend, Rowley Jefferson, escape from a game of Gladiator and learn from their friend, Chirag Gupta, about a moldy piece of cheese on the basketball court that makes anyone who touches it an outcast and that the only way to get rid of what is known as “the Cheese Touch” is to pass it on to someone else. They also meet Angie Steadman, a seventh-grader who isolates herself from the other students to "survive". Greg states his intention of becoming the most popular student in school.
The next day, Greg signs up for wrestling but suffers back-to-back humiliating losses against eccentric outcast, Fregley, and his elementary school arch-enemy, Patty Farrell, making him decide to quit wrestling. On Halloween, while Greg and Rowley are out trick-or-treating, a group of teenage boys (Peter "Pete" Hosey, Carter and Wade) drive by in a pickup truck and spray a fire extinguisher at them. When Greg threatens to call the police, the teenagers chase them to Greg’s grandmother's house, but the latter two escape them after Greg accidentally damages the truck.
The boys join the Safety Patrol to become popular, and they try out for a contest that offers a student a chance to become the new cartoonist for the school paper as a replacement for Brian Little, who recently got glandular fever, causing him to be out for 3 months. Greg accidentally breaks Rowley's arm, prompting other students to take pity on Rowley, thus making him popular. Greg's envy towards him only increases when Rowley wins the cartoonist contest. During a Safety Patrol assignment, Greg substitutes for Rowley and walks kindergartners down a neighborhood street, but panics when he encounters a truck identical to the teenagers' from Halloween and hides the kids in a construction zone. After being spotted by neighbor, Mrs. Irvine, who mistakes him for Rowley, he abandons the kindergarteners and flees. To his bewilderment, Rowley is suspended from Safety Patrol, but Greg eventually confesses the truth to him, offering it as a joke. Distraught at Greg's consistent mistreatment of him, Rowley ends their friendship. Greg is eventually dismissed from Safety Patrol while Rowley is reinstated as team captain and finds a new best friend in their classmate, Collin Lee.
Greg decides to pursue popularity without Rowley by joining the school's production of The Wonderful Wizard of Oz. At tryouts, Greg is offered the role of Dorothy due to his soprano voice. He declines the role, and Patty threatens the teacher, Mrs. Norton, into casting her instead. Greg agrees to play as a tree after learning that the trees get to throw apples at Dorothy, but this scene is cut from the play and replaced with a musical number, much to his dismay. During the performance, Greg refuses to sing when he notices his older brother, Rodrick, mockingly videotaping him. This prompts Patty to angrily berate him onstage, and Greg begins throwing apples at her, causing the performance to end in chaos, and Greg gets beaten up by Patty again. Later on, Greg reluctantly attends the school’s mother-son dance. His mother, Susan, encourages Greg to try to reconcile with Rowley, but he is rejected. He can only dejectedly watch as Rowley and his mother, Linda, win the crowd over with a dance routine to "Intergalactic" by the Beastie Boys.
One day at recess, Greg and Rowley loudly confront each other and a circle of students encourage them to fight; however, neither of them are good at fighting. The teenage boys from Halloween arrive at the scene and force Rowley to eat part of the Cheese. They flee the scene when the school's P.E. teacher, Coach Eduardo Malone, arrives, but when the other kids notice that the Cheese has been eaten, Greg lies to save Rowley's reputation at school, mending their friendship, and also making Greg Heffly have the Cheese Touch.
At the end of the school year, Greg and Rowley make the yearbook Class Favorites page as "Cutest Friends”.


== Cast ==
Zachary Gordon as Greg Heffley.
Nathaniel Marten as adult Greg.
Dylan Bell as young Greg.
Raugi Yu as Vice Principal Roy, the Vice Principal who appears on the intercom or TV giving news.
Robert Capron as Rowley Jefferson, Greg's childish best friend.
Devon Bostick as Rodrick Heffley, Greg's older brother.
Jennifer Clement as Mrs. Flint, Greg's homeroom teacher.
Steve Zahn as Frank Heffley, Greg's father.
Rachael Harris as Susan Heffley, Greg's mother.
Chloë Grace Moretz as Angie Steadman, a seventh-grader at Greg's school who is a reporter for the school paper. She is a brand new character not found in the original book.
Karan Brar as Chirag Gupta, a friend of Greg's.
Grayson Russell as Fregley, a weird classmate of Greg's.
Laine MacNeil as Patty Farrell, Greg's arch-enemy.
Madison Bell as young Patty.
Alex Ferris as Collin Lee, Rowley's substitute best friend during his fight with Greg.
Andrew McNee as Coach Malone, Greg's gym teacher.
Connor and Owen Fielding as Manny Heffley, Greg's little brother.
Belita Moreno as Mrs. Norton, Greg's acting teacher.
Alf Humphreys as Mr. Jefferson, Rowley's father who dislikes Greg.
Kaye Capron as Mrs. Jefferson, Rowley's mother.
Donnie McNeil as Wade, one of the 3 teenagers who threw water at Greg and Rowley.
Nicholas Carey as Peter "Pete" Hosey, the leader of the 3 teenagers who threw water at Greg and Rowley.
Samuel Patrick Chu as Carter, another one of the 3 teenagers who threw water at Greg and Rowley.
Rob LaBelle as Mr. Winsky, the leader of the Safety Patrol.
Harrison Houde as Darren Walsh, Greg's classmate who is infamous for starting the Cheese Touch.
Severin Korfer as Dieter Muller, a German exchange student who took the Cheese Touch with him back to his homeland.
Owen Best as Bryce Anderson, one of Greg's classmates who was said to have a "cute butt".
Karin Konoval as Mrs. Irvine, the woman who thought Rowley terrorized the kindergartners.
Adam Osei as Marty Porter, the school treasurer.
Paul Hubbard as Brock Brainigan P.I.


== Production ==
The filming of Diary of a Wimpy Kid was in Vancouver and wrapped up on October 16, 2009. Lucas Cruikshank, best known for creating the web series Fred, had auditioned for the role as Greg Heffley. Even though Cruikshank was 16 at the time, the crew members were impressed with his performance, but was not given the part as he was "too old for the role". Instead, the role of Greg was given to Zachary Gordon.The official trailer for Diary of a Wimpy Kid was released virally on January 21, 2010 and was shown in theaters with Tooth Fairy. A poster for the film was released shortly after. Another trailer was shown with Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Lightning Thief.The official Facebook account for Diary of a Wimpy Kid had uploaded three clips from the film, as of March 1, 2010.
In the United Kingdom and Ireland the film was released in cinemas on August 25, 2010.


== Soundtrack ==
The soundtrack was released on CD by La La Land Records with the score composed by Theodore Shapiro, containing 34 tracks.


== Distribution ==


=== Tie-in book ===

A tie-in book, written by Kinney, called The Wimpy Kid Movie Diary, was published on March 16, 2010, by Amulet Books (an imprint of Abrams Books). It includes film stills, storyboards, preliminary concept drawings and also behind-the-scenes information to humorously chronicle the making of Diary of a Wimpy Kid, Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Rodrick Rules, and Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Dog Days. It also includes some new illustrations.


=== Home media ===
The film was released on DVD and Blu-ray on August 3, 2010. The Blu-ray version features six pages from Rowley's diary, Diary of an Awesome, Friendly Kid. The film was released on the streaming service Disney+ on November 12, 2019; its launch date.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Review aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an approval rating of 54%, based on 106 reviews with an average rating of 5.51/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Unlike its bestselling source material, Diary of a Wimpy Kid fails to place a likable protagonist at the center of its middle-school humor – and its underlying message is drowned out as a result." It also holds a rating of 56/100 at Metacritic, based on 26 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Roger Ebert gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, writing "It's nimble, bright and funny. It doesn't dumb down. It doesn't patronize. It knows something about human nature." Glenn Whipp of the Associated Press was less positive, saying, "In transferring the clean, precise humor of Kinney's illustrations and prose to the big-screen, the material loses just a bit of its charm." At the Movies host David Stratton gave the film one star while co-host Margaret Pomeranz gave it half a star. Stratton called the film "tiresome" and said there was "nothing remotely interesting in Thor Freudenthal's direction or the screenplay." Pomeranz disliked the character of Greg Heffley, saying "I really thought he was unpleasant. I did not want to spend time with him. I could not wait for the end of this film." OregonLive.com gave the movie a C+ grade, criticizing it for being "too often dull, unappealing and clumsy, hobbled by unnecessary changes and inventions that add no charm, energy or, truly, point."


=== Box office ===
Despite a lack of distinctive marketing, Diary of a Wimpy Kid drew a decent crowd, opening to $22.1 million on approximately 3,400 screens at 3,077 sites, in second place at the weekend box office behind Alice in Wonderland but beating out the heavily hyped The Bounty Hunter. It was the biggest start ever for a non-animated, non-fantasy children's book adaptation. Diary of a Wimpy Kid grossed more in its first three days than other film adaptions to children's novels like How to Eat Fried Worms and Hoot grossed in their entire runs. The film grossed $64,003,625 in North America and $11,696,873 in other territories for a worldwide total of $75,700,498.


=== Accolades ===


== Sequels ==
Three sequels were released in 2011, 2012 and 2017 respectively. Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Rodrick Rules was released on March 25, 2011. It was based on the second book in the series, Rodrick Rules. Zachary Gordon reprised his role in the film. Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Dog Days was released on August 3, 2012, and is based on The Last Straw and Dog Days, including scenes from both books. An animated short film, Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Class Clown, was released along with the DVD of Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Dog Days. A film based on The Long Haul was released in May 2017 featuring a new cast starring Jason Drucker, Alicia Silverstone, and Tom Everett Scott.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Diary of a Wimpy Kid at IMDb
Diary of a Wimpy Kid at AllMovie
Diary of a Wimpy Kid at Box Office Mojo
Diary of a Wimpy Kid at Rotten Tomatoes