Dickie Roberts: Former Child Star is a 2003 American comedy film directed by Sam Weisman and starring David Spade (who also co-wrote the film with Fred Wolf), Mary McCormack, Jon Lovitz, Craig Bierko, Alyssa Milano, and Rob Reiner. Spade portrays a child actor who fell into obscurity as an adult and who attempts to revive his career by getting a part in Rob Reiner's next film. In addition, the movie shows Dickie interacting with numerous former child stars, played by over two dozen actual former stars lampooning their careers, such as Leif Garrett, Barry Williams, Corey Feldman, Emannuel Lewis, Dustin Diamond, and Danny Bonaduce.


== Plot ==
Dickie Roberts (Nicholas Schwerin) is a child star who shot to fame on a television sitcom called The Glimmer Gang with his spoonerism catchphrase "This is Nucking Futs!". His career subsequently halted after his 6th birthday.
Since his heyday years later, Dickie (David Spade) has been reduced to parking cars at a Morton's restaurant and appearing on Celebrity Boxing, where he is matched with Emmanuel Lewis. In the public eye and to his girlfriend Cyndi (Alyssa Milano) who apparently leaves him during a roadside incident, Dickie is washed up.
After talking to his old friend Leif Garrett, Dickie is absolutely convinced that a new Rob Reiner movie in the works titled Mr. Blake's Backyard will be his comeback vehicle. Even after his agent Sidney Wermack (Jon Lovitz) fails to land him an audition, Dickie persists. While on duty at Morton's, he joyrides in a customer's vehicle and drops into an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting where he pesters Tom Arnold to connect him with Reiner. After he is kicked out because he's not an alcoholic, Dickie fakes being drunk and enters a Lamaze class which Brendan Fraser is taking with his wife. He finds Dickie's entrance to the class hilarious and ridiculous, and he agrees to help him out and calls Reiner for Dickie.
Reiner bluntly tells Dickie that the part is not within his abilities because it requires knowing how a regular person lives. Unfortunately, Dickie never had a real childhood; he grew up in the limelight, and then his mother Peggy (Doris Roberts) abandoned him when his show was cancelled. Desperate to prove to Reiner that he is right for the part, Dickie sells his raunchy autobiography to raise $30,000. With the money, he pays a family to "adopt" him for a month, as he believes he will "watch and learn".
Once Dickie hires his "family", things get off to a rocky start, as George (Craig Bierko), the bread-winning father, insists that they need the money, despite the rightful reservations of the other family members. Grace (Mary McCormack), the mother, comes to pity and gradually provides him with surrogate guidance, realizing the lesson from Mr. Blake's Backyard itself: sometimes all of the things you need are in your own backyard. Dickie learns much about himself and life in general, and he begins to act as a third parent. He helps the family's son Sam (Scott Terra) secure a date and helps the daughter Sally (Jenna Boyd) join the pep squad. Cyndi returns to him and is admired by George, who turns out to be inept on the subject of fidelity.
Sidney lands an audition for Dickie by donating a kidney to Reiner after Reiner is savagely beaten by a psychotic street person (Sasha Mitchell) whom Dickie provoked while unknowingly driving Reiner's vehicle. Dickie is awarded the part, proving that "In Hollywood, Sometimes Your Dreams Can Come True...Again". After George and Cyndi abandon the household together, Dickie gives up the part to be with the family he has come to love.
An E! True Hollywood Story report on Dickie, who now turns his real story into a new sitcom that uses all of his old friends, as well as his new family (including Grace, whom he has married).
The closing credits are a send-up on Relief albums listed as "To help former child stars" and includes many references to old television sitcoms where Dickie, Leif, their mutual friends, Florence Henderson, Marion Ross, and other former child stars sing "Child Stars on Your Television".


== Cast ==
David Spade as Dickie Roberts, a former child star looking to make a comeback.
Nicholas Schwerin portrays a younger Dickie.
Mary McCormack as Grace Finney, a woman who reluctantly allows Dickie to live with her family during his audition.
Jon Lovitz as Sidney Wermack, Dickie's agent.
Craig Bierko as George Finney, Grace's husband who agrees to let Dickie stay with them without consulting her.
Alyssa Milano as Cyndi, Dickie's former girlfriend.
Rob Reiner as himself, he is working on a film Mr. Blake's Backyard that Dickie wants to get a part in.
Scott Terra as Sam Finney, the son of Grace and George.
Jenna Boyd as Sally Finney, the daughter of Grace and George and the sister of Sam.
Doris Roberts as Peggy Roberts, the mother of Dickie
Michael Buffer as himself, he was the ring announcer on Celebrity Boxing.
John Farley as a referee on Celebrity Boxing.
Fred Wolf as Dickie's Corner Man
Joey Diaz and Kevin Grevioux as Emmanuel's Entourage
Spencer Garrett and Hal Sparks as Publishers
Rachel Dratch as Rob Reiner's Secretary
Retta as Sad Eye Sadie
Ian Gomez as Strange Man
Edie McClurg as Mrs. Gertrude
Ambyr Childers as Barbie
Michael McDonald as Maitre D'
Kevin Farley as Valet
Sasha Mitchell as Angry Driver, a man whose car Dickie borrows.
Erin Murphy as Brittany
Tom Arnold as himself, he is encountered by Dickie at an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting.
Dick Van Patten as himself
Jann Carl as herself
Peter Dante as himself
Jonathan Loughran as himself
Florence Henderson as herself, she partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Marion Ross as herself, she partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
David Soul as himself (archive footage), he was said to be the father of Dickie through Peggy.
Brendan Fraser as himself (uncredited), Dickie encounters him at a Lamaze class with his wife.


=== Former child star cameos ===
Willie Aames as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Fred Berry as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Danny Bonaduce as himself, he appears as a friend of Dickie.
Todd Bridges as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Gary Coleman as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Jeff Conaway as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Dustin Diamond as himself, he appears as a friend of Dickie.
Tony Dow as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Corey Feldman as himself, he appears as a friend of Dickie.
Leif Garrett as himself, he appears as a friend of Dickie.
Corey Haim as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song where he sings alongside Corey Feldman.
Christopher Knight as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Emmanuel Lewis as himself, he pairs off against Dickie in Celebrity Boxing.
Barry Livingston as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Mike Lookinland as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Maureen McCormick as herself, she partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Eddie Mekka as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Jeremy Miller as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Erin Moran as herself, she partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Haywood Nelson as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Jay North as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Ron Palillo as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Butch Patrick as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Paul Petersen as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" songs.
Adam Rich as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Rodney Allen Rippy as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Ernest Lee Thomas as himself, he partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Charlene Tilton as herself, she partakes in the "Child Stars on Your Television" song.
Barry Williams as himself, he appears as a friend of Dickie who doubts that Brendan Fraser would hook him up with Rob Reiner.


== Production ==
Fred Wolf and David Spade originally wrote a skit in the '90s for Saturday Night Live about a child star rampage, spoofing The Silence of the Lambs, for when Macaulay Culkin was hosting, but it was cut. The idea was later pitched to The WB, but they turned it down. It was eventually totally rewritten and turned into this movie, originally written as a dark comedy with more references to drug use by child stars.
Sally's "Brick wall, waterfall" routine was something Jenna Boyd was doing on the set between takes. The filmmakers liked it and worked it into the script – twice.
The crew built an actual treehouse in the back yard of the house used for the exterior scenes of the Finney's home. The real homeowners liked it so much, they requested that the producers to leave it up after filming.


=== Lawsuit ===
Paramount Pictures was sued for trademark infringement and dilution after this film was released. Paramount had not requested permission from Wham-O for using the Slip 'n Slide in this movie.  The lawsuit claimed that the movie, which portrayed unsafe use of a Slip 'n Slide, might encourage others to use it in an unsafe manner. The lawsuit was dismissed by a California court.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Dickie Roberts earned $6.7 million on its opening weekend. It went on to gross a worldwide total of $23.7 million against a production budget of $17 million.


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 22% based on reviews from 121 critics. The sites consensus is: "A so-so David Spade comedy with a few laughs". On Metacritic the film has a score of 36% based on reviews from 31 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade "B" on scale of A to F.While critics generally agreed that the premise had potential and appreciated the involvement of actual former child stars, reactions to Spade's humor were mixed, and the attempts to make the film genuinely uplifting and sentimental in its second half were seen as contrived and unnecessary. Roger Ebert gave the movie two-out-of-four stars, noting "'Dickie Roberts: Former Child Star' has a premise that would be catnip for Steve Martin or Jim Carrey, but David Spade (who, to be fair, came up with the premise) casts a pall of smarmy sincerity over the material." 
Joe Leydon of Variety wrote: "Offers a largely satisfying mix of broad slapstick, seriocomic sentimentality and mostly amusing satirical thrusts at easy targets." 
Sheri Linden of The Hollywood Reporter gave it a mixed review: "Generally succeeds -- in hit-and-miss fashion -- at bridging the gap between unlikable jerk and misunderstood good guy, though it's still something of a leap to leading-man territory."Kevin Thomas of the Los Angeles Times gave the film a positive review: "This sleek and sunny comedy is an all-too-rare example of smart and inventive Hollywood filmmaking." 
Peter Hartlaub of the San Francisco Chronicle gave it a positive review, praising the writing saying the film "rises above mediocrity with a steady stream of offbeat humor, as writers Spade and Fred Wolf stubbornly avoid the easy jokes throughout the film." He is also positive about the many cameos and says the film "is elevated from decent to good in the last five minutes, during a hilarious "We Are the World"-style medley among child actors and their parents."


== References ==


== External links ==
Dickie Roberts: Former Child Star at IMDb
Dickie Roberts: Former Child Star at the TCM Movie Database
Dickie Roberts: Former Child Star at Box Office Mojo