Down with Love is a 2003 romantic comedy film directed by Peyton Reed. It stars Renée Zellweger and Ewan McGregor, and is a pastiche of the early 1960s American "no-sex sex comedies" such as Pillow Talk and Lover Come Back (which both starred Rock Hudson, Doris Day, and Tony Randall) and the "myriad spawn" of derivative films that followed. Time film critic Richard Corliss, estimating conservatively, wrote that Down with Love "is so clogged with specific references to a half-dozen Rock-and-Doris-type comedies that it serves as definitive distillation of the genre."Randall himself plays a small role in Down with Love, "bestowing his sly, patriarchal blessing" on the film that also stars David Hyde Pierce (in the neurotic best friend role often played by Randall or Gig Young), Sarah Paulson, Rachel Dratch, Jeri Ryan, and Jack Plotnick, who spoofs the kind of role Chet Stratton played in Lover Come Back.
Typical of the genre the film tells the story of a woman who advocates female independence in combat with a lothario, the plot reflects the attitudes and behaviour of the early pre-sexual revolution 1960s but has an anachronistic conclusion driven by more modern, post-feminist ideas and attitudes.


== Plot ==
In New York City in 1962, aspiring author Barbara Novak arrives at Banner House to present her new work, Down with Love, a book aiming to free women from love, teach them to enjoy sex without commitment, and to replace the need for a man with things such as chocolate. Following her rules would, she believes, help to give women a boost in the workplace and in the world in general. When the men who run Banner House refuse to support the book, Vikki Hiller, Barbara's editor, suggests Barbara meet with Catcher Block – a successful writer for the magazine Know and a notorious ladies' man – in order to promote the book. However, Catcher avoids her repeatedly by postponing their dates until she gets fed up, insults him, and walks out. Catcher's boss and best friend, Peter MacMannus, and Vikki take a liking to one another. However, their relationship revolves around Barbara and Catcher, and neither is brave enough to express their feelings for the other. Peter feels overshadowed by Catcher's strong personality, and Vikki wants to see strength in her lover, even assuming that Peter must be gay.
Barbara starts promoting her book with Vikki's help, and things take off when they get Judy Garland to sing the song "Down with Love" as a promotion to the book on The Ed Sullivan Show. Sales skyrocket, as housewives and women around the world buy the book and rebel against their men; Catcher now wants to meet Barbara, but now it is she who rejects him. The breaking point comes as Barbara appears on a national TV show talking about a chapter from the book – "The Worst Kind of Man" – and cites Catcher Block as the perfect example, causing his dates to reject him, much to his fury.
Vowing to prove Barbara wants love and marriage like every other women, Catcher arranges for a casual meeting at a drycleaners, taking advantage of the fact that Barbara has never met or seen him, and he poses as Major Zip Martin, a polite and attentive astronaut. Barbara appears to be immediately infatuated with this man who seemingly has no idea who she is, in contrast to men who now avoid her since the publication of her book. "Zip" takes her to the most fashionable locations in New York while maintaining considerable sexual tension between them by feigning naivete and a desire to remain chaste until he is "ready" for a physical relationship. But he starts falling for her for real, complicating his plan.
When Barbara finds Catcher/Zip at a party he is almost caught out, and decides it is time to take everything to the next level: he tells Barbara that Catcher Block wants to interview him for an exposé on the NASA space program and asks her to accompany him. It is his own apartment and he sets everything up to record her saying she loves him. Unfortunately, as they begin to have sex, one of his many lovers, Gwendolyn, walks in on them, and not knowing who Barbara is, exposes Catcher's identity and leaves, forcing him to come clean to Barbara. But then it is Barbara who reveals the truth: she knew who he was from the beginning, but she also lied as she is actually Nancy Brown, once one of Catcher's many secretaries, who fell in love with him whilst working at Know but turned him down when he asked her out because she did not want to be just one of his many flings. She did this to be different from all the women he knew, and make him love her like she loves him. As they embrace, Catcher proclaims he wants to marry her, but Gwendolyn then returns, having overheard him say Barbara Novak's name, and thanks Barbara for what she has done for womankind. Barbara realizes that she does not want love or him as she has become a real "down with love" girl. Vikki and Peter's relationship also changes when she insults him for helping Catcher. Peter realizes he is indeed like any other man and takes Vikki to Catcher's apartment to have passionate sex with her.
Days later, Catcher is completely depressed and unsuccessful at winning Barbara back. Even his exposé, which he wrote on how falling in love with her made him a better man, is ruined now that Barbara has told her story in her own magazine, Now. Learning of an opening at Now, he goes in for an interview with her, and tells her how much she changed him. Though she resists her lingering feelings, he says he wishes there could be a middle ground for them, somewhere between her confident blonde persona and her original brunette persona. As he is leaving her office, she surprises him on the elevator, showing him a bright red hair style: she has found the middle ground and she wants to be with him. They fly to Las Vegas to get married, influencing Vikki and Peter, who also decide to get married.
The end credits show their marriage has resulted in a new book intended to end the battle of the sexes. The pair end by singing "Here's To Love".


== Cast ==
Renée Zellweger as Barbara Novak
Ewan McGregor as Catcher Block
Sarah Paulson as Vikki Hiller
David Hyde Pierce as Peter MacMannus
Rachel Dratch as Gladys
Jack Plotnick as Maurice
Tony Randall as Theodore Banner
John Aylward as E.G.
Warren Munson as C.B.
Matt Ross as J.B.
Michael Ensign as J.R.
Timothy Omundson as R.J.
Jeri Ryan as Gwendolyn
Ivana Miličević as Yvette
Melissa George as Elkie
Dorie Barton as Sally


=== Additional voice cast ===


== Style ==
The sets, costumes, cinematography, editing, score, opening credits, and visual effects (including split-screen shots during phone calls heavily laced with double entendres between the two leads), are carefully designed to echo the style of 1960s comedies. The New York City skyline of 1962 was digitally recreated for backdrops. A greenscreen technique was used to simulate unconvincing 1960s rear projection using restored street footage from the late 1950s and early 1960s. The film begins with the 1960s logos for 20th Century Fox and for CinemaScope, a wide-screen process introduced in the 1950s, developed and owned by 20th Century Fox, with the 1998 version of the fanfare, composed by Alfred Newman. The Regency Enterprises logo is in pink, and contains a saxophone jazz rendition of its theme.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Down with Love was chosen as "the perfect film" to open the second Tribeca Film Festival where it made its premiere. The film opened first in New York, and was released country wide a week later May 16, 2003. The film was released as counter programming against The Matrix Reloaded. The film performed worse than expected, earning $40 million at the international box office.


=== Critical response ===
At the time of its release Down With Love received extremely varying reviews. Chicago Sun-Times critic Roger Ebert spoke of the film fairly positively, saying parts were "fun" and describing Zellweger's speech at the end as "a torrent of words [pouring] out from her character's innermost soul." A. O. Scott in The New York Times praised director "Reed's buoyant homage," Zellweger's Doris Day-like ability to "swivel engagingly between goofiness and sex appeal," McGregor's Sinatra-like "wiry, wolfish energy" and screenwriters Ahlert's and Drake's "canny cocktail of period vernacular and deliberately labored double entendres," finding the movie "intelligent and amusing" with "a glorious, hectic artificiality." But he questioned "the point of the exercise" compared to Todd Haynes' Far From Heaven, which "plunged into the subtext of those old movies," whereas Down with Love, being an "updating and a critique," "snips that subtext away," making it "less sophisticated than what it imitates."Conversely, The San Francisco Chronicle's Mick LaSalle wrote "Down With Love is superior to Far From Heaven", which "seems naive in comparison" because "Down with Love is a very smart, very shrewd movie, and the smartest, shrewdest thing about it is the way it masquerades as just a fluffy comedy, a diversion, a trifle. Hardly a trifle, Down With Love distills 40 years of sexual politics into 100 minutes, using the romantic-comedy conventions of an earlier time to comment on the governing social assumptions of yesterday -- and today, as well... The brilliance of Down With Love is that it slyly reminds us that our modern perspective, like every 'modern perspective' that preceded it, is doomed to obsolescence and isn't some final stage of enlightened social thought."Opposing opinions even occurred at the same newspaper, as was the case with The New York Observer, where Rex Reed's review was headlined "Down With Down With Love!" but Andrew Sarris's headline countered with "It's Affectionate and Smart, And I'm Down With Love."Richard Corliss of Time admired Orlandi's costumes and Laws' design for their "giddily precise exaggeration" and wrote that the script "has a gentle heart to humanize its sharp sitcom wit," advising his readers to "stay for the movie's denouement: a two-minute speech that wraps up the plot like Christmas ribbons around a time bomb." But he found the film to be "miscast at the top" and "conflicted about its subject -- it both derides and adores what it means to parody" and that director "Reed often uses a gong where chimes would do." Corliss concludes: "As you see, we too are conflicted about this film. We want to love it, but like a Rock Hudson rake, we keep finding fault in its allure. We want to hate it, but like Doris Day, we finally can't say no."Nathan Rabin wrote that Chicago critics by and large embraced Down With Love, noting: "It got two thumbs up from Ebert & Roeper and was No. 2 on the Top 10 list of Chicago Reader critic Jonathan Rosenbaum, who called it a "masterpiece" and wrote "If a more interesting and entertaining Hollywood movie than Down with Love has come along this year, I've missed it."In the years after its release, Rabin and Rosenbaum in an updated piece and Richard Brody at The New Yorker are among the critics and film theorists that have continued to write in praise of the film.Down with Love current holds a 60% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on reviews from 179 critics, with an average rating of 6.10/10. The site's consensus states: "Looks great, but Zellweger and McGregor have no chemistry together, and the self-satisfied, knowing tone grates." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 52 out of 100 based on 39 critics' reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews".In August 2018 the magazine Vanity Fair put Down With Love at Number 13 on their list of the top "25 Best Romantic Comedies of All Time". In June 2017 Chicago critic Jonathan Rosenbaum named Down With Love one of his "25 Favorite Films of the 21st Century (so far)".


== Music ==
The film's title comes from the song "Down with Love" as sung by Judy Garland, who is seen singing it on The Ed Sullivan Show in one scene.
The song "Here's to Love" sung by Zellweger and McGregor during the closing credits (and in its entirety on the DVD release as a special feature) was a last-minute addition to the film. Songwriters Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman appear in the number as the bartender and the pianist. According to the DVD commentary, it was added at the suggestion of McGregor, who pointed out the opportunity the filmmakers had to unite the stars of two recently popular musical films (his Moulin Rouge! and Zellweger's Chicago).
The songs "Kissing a Fool" and "For Once in My Life", sung by Michael Bublé, previously appeared on Bublé's 2003 self-titled album.


== Track listing ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Down with Love at IMDb
Down with Love at Rotten Tomatoes
Down with Love at AllMovie