Eat Drink Man Woman (Chinese: 飲食男女) is a 1994 comedy-drama film directed by Ang Lee and starring Sihung Lung, Yu-wen Wang, Chien-lien Wu, and Kuei-mei Yang. The film was released on 3 August 1994, and it was both a critical and box office success. In 1994, the film received the Asia Pacific Film Festival Award for Best Film, and in 1995 it received an Academy Award Nomination for Best Foreign Language Film.The title is a quote from the Book of Rites, one of the Confucian classics, referring to the basic human desires and accepting them as natural. The beginning of the quote reads as follows: "The things which men greatly desire are comprehended in meat and drink and sexual pleasure;" (Translation by James Legge) Classical Chinese:「飲食男女，人之大欲存焉」.Many of the cast members had appeared in Ang Lee's previous films. Sihung Lung and Ah Lei Gua played central elderly figures dealing with the transition from tradition to modernity in The Wedding Banquet, in which Winston Chao also starred. Sihung Lung played an immigrant father in Pushing Hands. These three films show the tensions between the generations of a Confucian family, between East and West, and between tradition and modernity. They form what has been called Lee's "Father Knows Best" trilogy.  The script was written by Ang Lee, James Schamus and Hui-Ling Wang.


== Plot ==
The setting is 1990s contemporary Taipei, Taiwan. Mr. Chu, a widower who is a master Chinese chef, has three unmarried daughters, each of whom challenges any narrow definition of traditional Chinese culture: Chu Jia-Jen, a school teacher nursing a broken heart who converted to Christianity; Chu Jia-Chien, a fiercely independent airline executive who carries her father's culinary legacy, but never got to pursue that passion; and Chu Jia-Ning, a college student who meets her friend's on-again off-again ex-boyfriend and starts a relationship with him.
Each Sunday, Mr. Chu makes a glorious banquet for his daughters, but the dinner table is also the family forum, to which each daughter brings "announcements" as they negotiate the transition from traditional "father knows best" attitudes to a new tradition which encompasses old values in new forms.
As the film progresses, each daughter encounters new men. When these new relationships blossom, their roles are altered and the dynamics within the family change. The father eventually brings the greatest surprise by marrying Liang Jin-Rong.


== Cast ==
Sihung Lung as Chu
Kuei-Mei Yang as Jia-Jen
Chien-lien Wu as Jia-Chien
Chien-lien Wu also portrays Chu's dead wife.
Yu-Wen Wang as Jia-Ning
Sylvia Chang as Jin-Rong
Winston Chao as Li Kai
Chao-jung Chen as Guo Lun
Lester Chit-Man Chan as Raymond
Yu Chen as Rachel
Gua Ah-leh as Madame Liang
Chi-Der Hong as Class Leader
Gin-Ming Hsu as Coach Chai
Huel-Yi Lin as Sister Chang
Shih-Jay Lin as Chief's Son
Chin-Cheng Lu as Ming-Dao
Cho-Gin Nei as Airline Secretary
Yu-Chien Tang as Shan-Shan
Chung Ting as Priest
Hari as Construction Worker
Cheng-Fen Tso as Fast Food Manager
Man-Sheng Tu as Restaurant Manager
Zul as Mendaki
Chuen Wang as Chief
Reuben Foong as Drama Mamma
Jui Wang as Old Wen
Hwa Wu as Old Man


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
In her review in The New York Times, Janet Maslin praised Ang Lee as "a warmly engaging storyteller". She wrote, "Wonderfully seductive, and nicely knowing about all of its characters' appetites, Eat Drink Man Woman makes for an uncomplicatedly pleasant experience".In his review in The Washington Post, Hal Hinson called the film a "beautiful balance of elements ... mellow, harmonious and poignantly funny". Hinson concluded:

As the relationships evolve and deepen, there seems to be a surprise around every corner—for both the characters and the audience. But what is most surprising, perhaps, is how involved we become with these people. As satisfying as food can be, the fullness we feel at the end here is far richer and more complex than that offered by the most extravagant meal. " Eat Drink Man Woman" is a delicacy but also something more—something like food for the heart.
According to the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 88% of critics have given the film a positive review based on 49 reviews, with an average rating of 7.56/10. The site's critics consensus reads, "A richly layered look at the complex interactions between a widowed chef and his daughters, Ang Lee's generational comedy Eat Drink Man Woman offers filmgoers a tasty cinematic treat."


=== Box office ===
The film grossed $24.1 million worldwide generating the third biggest percentage return on cost of films released in the year, behind Four Weddings and a Funeral and The Lion King. It was the highest-grossing foreign-language film in the United States and Canada for the year with a gross of $7.3 million.


=== Influence ===
Tortilla Soup, a 2001 American comedy-drama film directed by Maria Ripoll, is based on Eat Drink Man Woman. A sequel, Eat Drink Man Woman 2012 [饮食男女2012] (titled Joyful Reunion in English) was released, with Jui-Yuan Tsao, producer for the original film, serving as director, and a new set of characters exploring similar themes.


=== Year-end lists ===
4th – Robert Denerstein, Rocky Mountain News
7th – James Berardinelli, ReelViews
Top 10 (listed alphabetically, not ranked) – Mike Clark, USA Today
Top 10 (listed alphabetically, not ranked) – Jimmy Fowler, Dallas Observer
Top 10 (listed alphabetically, not ranked) – William Arnold, Seattle Post-Intelligencer
Top 10 (listed alphabetically, not ranked) – Jeff Simon, The Buffalo News
Top 10 (listed alphabetically, not ranked) – Mike Mayo, The Roanoke Times
Top 10 (listed alphabetically, not ranked) – Steve Murray, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
Top 10 (not ranked) – Dennis King, Tulsa World
Top 10 (not ranked) – George Meyer, The Ledger
Top 10 (not ranked) – Bob Carlton, The Birmingham News
Top 10 runner-ups (not ranked) – Janet Maslin, The New York Times
"The second 10" (not ranked) – Sean P. Means, The Salt Lake Tribune
Honorable mention – Michael MacCambridge, Austin American-Statesman
Honorable mention – Betsy Pickle, Knoxville News-Sentinel
Honorable mention – Duane Dudek, Milwaukee SentinelThe film ranked 54th in BBC's 2018 list of The 100 greatest foreign language films.


=== Awards ===
1994 Asia Pacific Film Festival Award for Best Film (Ang Lee) Won
1994 Asia Pacific Film Festival Award for Best Editing (Tim Squyres) Won
1995 Academy Award Nomination for Best Foreign Language Film
1994 Golden Horse Film Festival Award Nomination for Best Supporting Actress (Ya-lei Kuei)
1994 National Board of Review of Motion Pictures Award for Best Foreign Language Film Won
1994 National Board of Review of Motion Pictures Award for Top Foreign Films Won
1995 BAFTA Awards Nomination for Best Film not in the English Language
1995 Golden Globe Awards Nomination for Best Foreign Language Film
1995 Independent Spirit Awards Nomination for Best Cinematography (Jong Lin)
1995 Independent Spirit Awards Nomination for Best Director (Ang Lee)
1995 Independent Spirit Awards Nomination for Best Feature (Ted Hope, Hsu Li-kong, James Schamus)
1995 Independent Spirit Awards Nomination for Best Female Lead (Chien-lien Wu)
1995 Independent Spirit Awards Nomination for Best Male Lead (Sihung Lung)
1995 Independent Spirit Awards Nomination for Best Screenplay (Hui-Ling Wang, James Schamus, Ang Lee)
1995 Kansas City Film Critics Circle Award for Best Foreign Film Won


=== Musical Adaptation ===
Based on the film, a musical version opened in Taipei, Taiwan in 2019. 音樂劇《飲食男女》


== See also ==
List of submissions to the 67th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film
List of Taiwanese submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film


== References ==


=== Notes ===


=== Citations ===


== External links ==
Eat Drink Man Woman at IMDb
Eat Drink Man Woman at AllMovie
Eat Drink Man Woman at Rotten Tomatoes
Eat Drink Man Woman at Box Office Mojo
Eat Drink Man Woman at the American Film Institute Catalog