Entebbe (titled 7 Days in Entebbe in the U.S.) is a 2018 action thriller film directed by José Padilha and written by Gregory Burke. The film recounts the story of Operation Entebbe, a 1976 counter-terrorist hostage-rescue operation. The film stars Rosamund Pike and Daniel Brühl. It was released in the United States on 16 March 2018 and in the United Kingdom on 11 May 2018.


== Plot ==

The  Air France flight 139 from Tel Aviv to Paris is hijacked by German and Palestinian terrorists in June 1976 after a stopover in Athens. The two Germans Brigitte Kuhlmann and Wilfried Böse, members of the  Revolutionary cells, were previously with two men from the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine in a training camp in Yemen trained for this action and prepared not to show compassion. They deliberately hijacked an Air France plane because they accuse France of having helped Israel strengthen its army. Among other things, they want to free 40 Palestinians imprisoned in Israel. The hijackers force the captain to stop in Benghazi to refuel. From there, the aircraft can continue to fly undisturbed. Finally, the pilot is forced to land at the airport in the Ugandan city of Entebbe.
The next morning, the hostages are taken to an empty terminal at the airport. There he personally receives the president of Uganda, the dictator Idi Amin. He and his soldiers support the kidnappers. The two Germans guard the hostages while the Palestinians begin negotiations with Israel.
The Israeli Prime Minister Yitzchak Rabin, who is currently chairing a cabinet meeting in Jerusalem, receives a message informing him of the kidnapping and the fact that there are 83 Israelis on board. He and Secretary of Defense Shimon Peres learn from a British passenger that she was released because she pretended to be pregnant that two of the hijackers are German.
Peres advocates the use of the military, even if soldiers or hostages are killed in the process and diplomatic complications arise as a result. Rabin believes that it would be more prudent to negotiate, but sees no other way to maintain the raison d'etat and agrees.
When the Israeli government, contrary to its previous policy, signaled its willingness to negotiate to deceive the kidnappers, they released a large number of hostages. There is a dispute between the kidnappers because the Israelis must be selected and taken hostage. Among them is an old woman whom Wilfried Böse recognizes as a former prisoner KZ by the camp number tattooed on her arm. He is reluctant to take this approach because he reminds him of the  selection of Jews among the National Socialists and he does not want to be taken for a Nazi. The pilot of the hijacked machine refuses to abandon the Israeli hostages and stays with the entire crew in the terminal.
Meanwhile, the Israeli intelligence service is planning to rescue the hostages with a special unit of the Israel Defense Forces. After the satellite images were evaluated, General  Motta Gur recommended the deployment and the cabinet approved the release operation " Operation Thunderbolt", Israeli transport planes land in Entebbe at night without the knowledge of the Ugandan government. The task force approaches the terminal in a black limousine disguised as Idi Amin's [state car]]. The soldiers storm the building, engage in a shootout with the Ugandan soldiers, and shoot all the kidnappers. Four hostages die, but 102 can be freed.
During the liberation campaign, a theatrical dance performance with the traditional Passover song "Echad Mi Yodea"  instead. Among the dancers is the girlfriend of the soldier Zeev Hirsch, who at this very moment in Entebbe is risking his life for the liberation of his compatriots.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
On 11 February 2016, it was announced that José Padilha would next direct Entebbe for Working Title Films and StudioCanal, from a script by Gregory Burke. On 29 July 2016, Rosamund Pike, Daniel Brühl and Vincent Cassel joined to play the lead roles in the film, with Cassel ultimately not participating.Principal photography on the film began on 14 November 2016 in Malta, and production also took place in the U.K. During filming, a plane landed at Malta International Airport as a result of a real hijacking and scenes of passengers exiting after negotiations had succeeded were used in the movie.The film features extensive footage of the noted Batsheva Dance Company, dancing to a modern version of the traditional Jewish song Echad Mi Yodea. One of the characters in the film is a dancer in the troupe, and the dance is shown as the film opens and then throughout the film, intercut with portions of the narrative.


== Release ==
The film premiered on 19 February 2018 at the 68th Berlin International Film Festival. It was released in the United States on 16 March 2018, and received a release in the United Kingdom on 11 May 2018.


=== Promotion ===
An initial trailer for Entebbe was released on 7 December 2017, using the 1971 song "I'd Love to Change the World" by the band Ten Years After.


== Reception ==


=== Critical reception ===
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 24% based on 107 reviews, and an average rating of 5/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "7 Days in Entebbe has a worthy story to tell, but loses sight of its most compelling elements in a dull dramatization of riveting real-life events." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 49 out of 100, based on 29 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews."David Ehrlich of IndieWire gave the film a "C" and called it competent but pointless, saying: "When all the dust settles, we’re left right where we started, and with nothing to show for it but a fleeting reminder that peace is impossible without negotiation. It’s a lesson that history has failed to teach us, filtered through a movie that doesn’t understand why." The Chicago Sun-Times's Richard Roeper gave the film 2 out of 4 stars, writing, "All too often in 7 Days in Entebbe, primary characters on all sides of this 1970s period-piece political thriller state the obvious — and then state it again, and then have to stand around while someone else states the obvious one more time, just in case the folks in the seats have yet to grasp the stakes at hand and the dilemmas in play."Liel Leibovitz of Tablet criticized the film's downplaying of violence, such as the final raid being "shot in infuriating slow-motion and cross-cut with a modern dance performance", writing that the lack of violence eliminates the possibility of "catharsis" and renders the film a "vapid and vacuous statement".


=== Historical accuracy ===
The film puts Yonatan Netanyahu's death much earlier in the raid on the airport than had been portrayed in previous films on the subject or in the Netanyahu family's version of events. Director Padilha said that this placement was based on interviews with participants in the raid.
Although the production had commissioned British historian Saul David's 2015 study Operation Thunderbolt as a guide, the director opted to subordinate historical accuracy to dramatic effect in a number of scenes. Most notably, the division of the hostages and the Air France crew staying with the hostages are presented in a way that contradicts eyewitness accounts gathered by David.


== Soundtrack ==
All cues were produced and composed by Rodrigo Amarante


=== Credits and personnel ===
Rodrigo Amarante  – Arranger, Composer, Engineer, Primary Artist, Producer
John Bergin – Art Direction
Matthew Compton – Arranger
Eric Craig – A&R
Andrew Feinberg – A&R
Mark Graham – Conductor, Orchestration
Todd Dahl Hoff – Arranger, Engineer
Jake Jackson – Mixing
Lewis Jones – Engineer
Paul Katz – Executive Producer
Samur Khouja – Engineer
Kirsten Lane – Music Consultant
Brian McNelis – Executive Producer
David Reichardt – Engineer
Skip Williamson – Executive Producer


== See also ==
Victory at Entebbe - a 1976 American TV film about the events of Operation Entebbe
Raid on Entebbe - a 1977 American TV film about the same event
Operation Thunderbolt - a 1977 Israeli film
The Last King of Scotland - a 2006 British-German film containing the raid as a subplot
The Delta Force - a 1986 Israeli-American action thriller partially inspired by the events


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Entebbe at IMDb
7 Days in Entebbe at AllMovie
Entebbe at Metacritic
Entebbe at Rotten Tomatoes