First Sunday is a 2008 American comedy film written, produced and directed by David E. Talbert, and produced by Ice Cube, who also starred in the lead role. The film co-stars Katt Williams and Tracy Morgan. The film was released in the United States on January 11, 2008.
Ice Cube, Katt Williams, Rickey Smiley and Clifton Powell had all starred in the film Friday After Next six years prior.


== Plot ==
Durell (Ice Cube) and LeeJohn (Tracy Morgan) are best friends and bumbling petty criminals living in Baltimore. The two struggle to find stable jobs due to their lengthy criminal records. Simultaneously, Durell's ex, Omunique (Regina Hall) will have to move to Atlanta, and threatens to take their son, Durell Jr., with her unless Durell gives money to pay her lease on her business premises. Desperate for money, Durell and LeeJohn agree to sell wheelchairs provided by con man Blahka (Paul Campbell), but the duo lose them in a police chase. They are sentenced to 5,000 hours of community service and Blahka threatens to kill both of them unless they pay him $12,000 within 24 hours. They try to get a loan from a guy named Mordecai who runs a massage shop. They go to the shop and ask about a loan but are recommended a massage which LeeJohn believes to be a code. LeeJohn receives a massage and becomes attracted instantly to the receptionist, while the Minnie Riperton single, Lovin' You plays. It is revealed that the receptionist is Mordecai dressed as a woman, much to LeeJohn’s dismay. Durell and LeeJohn attend a church service and LeeJohn comes up with a desperate scheme to rob their neighborhood church. Durell is against the idea but eventually agrees, seeing no other option.
They enter the church's office and hold the church members hostage. The Deacon wants to move the church which angers some of the members including the Pastor's daughter Tianna ((Malinda Williams)). Durrel explains to them how what he is there for but no one takes hims seriously, so he fires a gun into the air and gain the church's attention. However, they find out that the money already been stolen. Enraged, they still hold the church hostage until the money turns up. Durrel interrogates everyone about the money's whereabouts. He appears to suspect Tianna, who looks down on him for obvious reasons. Meanwhile, LeeJohn takes Timmy, a little boy, to the bathroom as he was making a fuss about wanting to go. When he says that he will return the child back to his mother the kind sister Doris (Loretta Devine), the boy reveals that his real mother has left him.
The police pass by and Durell orders everyone to the back room and orders Ricky (Katt Williams) to poke his head out the door and talk to the police and the police simply figure that he is eccentric. The church is hot and Durell fixed the broken air conditioner, while LeeJohn watches over the hostages. To LeeJohn's bewilderment, sister Doris begins cooking for everyone, using the church's kitchen. Doris gives him a plate, and fondly remembers how her husband loved her cooking on his birthday. He expresses his sadness at never having had a birthday, and is comforted by Sister Doris.
After an awkward conversation, where Tianna warms to Durell and questions what he is doing, they finally get the air-conditioning going. Durell then orders everyone back to the lobby. The blind, deaf janitor finds the missing money. Durell receives a phone call from his son, which he is ashamed to answer. Momma T (Olivia Cole) then asks for Durell's purpose for what he is doing. Durell claims that he is doing it for his son. Momma T rejects his claim and says that Durell is doing it for himself, as he is blaming everyone but the person responsible, himself.
He drops the money. Unfortunately, cops have surrounded the church. The pastor (Chi McBride) tells them to escape out the back, but the two are caught in a chase. At their trial, which the entire church attends, the Deacon (Michael Beach) says that they have been accused of stealing $64,000. But the amount of money he claims was almost stolen was twice the amount the Deacon claimed was collected. This puts the Deacon at question. The case is dropped after no one stands when witnesses are called. Durell goes back to Omunique's apartment, where he is confronted by the men who gave them the wheelchairs.
After he explains his situation, the two men allow him to go and get his son. Omunique opens the door, yelling at Durell and asking him where the money come from. The money was left at her doorstep and Durell tells her it was a gift. He implores her not to take his son away, claiming that his son is all he has. She responds that she will stay. In the end, LeeJohn and Durell appear much happier. It is implied that Durell is closer to his ex-wife and son, while LeeJohn remains close to Doris and Timothy. The remaining money is used to restore the community and Tianna is seen painting a community center.


== Cast ==


== Reception ==
The film received negative reviews from critics. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 12% based on 75 reviews, with an average rating of 3.73/10. The website's critics consensus reads, "First Sunday may have its heart in the right place, but its funny bone is dislocated." Metacritic reported the film had an average score of 41 out of 100, based on 21 reviews.


=== Box Office ===
The film opened at #2 at the box office, behind The Bucket List, with $17,714,821 with an average of $8,004 from 2,213 theaters. When First Sunday closed on February 24, 2008, the film has grossed $37,931,869 from the North American box office and $844,216 in the foreign box office adding to $38,776,085 worldwide. It grossed more than $100,000 in only four regions outside of the United States, including South Africa ($189,960), the United Kingdom and Ireland ($152,372), Kuwait ($129,332) and the United Arab Emirates ($101,412).


== Releases ==
It was released January 11, 2008 in the United States and Canada and was released throughout Europe in April 2008. The film was released on DVD May 6, 2008. It was also released on Blu-ray, UMD and had an "Exclusive Edition" with a CD at Walmart.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
First Sunday at IMDb
First Sunday at AllMovie
First Sunday at Rotten Tomatoes
First Sunday at Metacritic
First Sunday at Box Office Mojo