Freeloaders is an American ensemble comedy film directed by Dan Rosen, and written by Rosen and singer Dave Gibbs. The film is produced by the Broken Lizard comedy troupe and is independently financed. Freeloaders stars Clifton Collins Jr., Josh Lawson, Kevin Sussman, Zoe Boyle, Nat Faxon, Warren Hutcherson, Jane Seymour, Olivia Munn, Dave Foley, and Counting Crows lead singer Adam Duritz.  It follows a group of friends who find their luxurious lifestyle threatened when the rock star they freeload off decides to sell his home.


== Premise ==
Six slackers who mooch off Counting Crows frontman Adam Duritz and have been crashing at his California mansion for years struggle to maintain their lifestyle when he informs them that he is selling his home. Individually, the friends seek new living arrangements to no avail, so they attempt to prevent the sale of the home altogether, as well as raise money to purchase it.


== Cast ==
Josh Lawson as Dave
Kevin Sussman as Benedict "Benny" Visvikis
Zoe Boyle as Emma Greenwood
Nat Faxon as Fritz
Warren Hutcherson as Trane
Brit Morgan as Samantha
Clifton Collins, Jr. as Vic
Jane Seymour as Carolyn
Olivia Munn as Madeline
Dave Foley as Himself
Adam Duritz as Himself
Denise Richards as Herself
Richard Branson as Himself
Jay Chandrasekhar and Paul Soter as Porn Producers
Kevin Heffernan as Scotty the Boom Guy
Steve Lemme as Captain Clam Beard
Erik Stolhanske as Jolly Roger


== Development ==
Freeloaders was brought to Broken Lizard early into its development, to help gain funding to produce the project. Principal photography was scheduled to begin in January 2009.  As of October 2010, Freeloaders had entered into post-production and was awaiting distribution.  On October 1, 2010, the film was privately screened by Broken Lizard and Duritz at the John Anson Ford Amphitheatre in Los Angeles. On November 3, 2011, Myriad Pictures acquired all distribution rights to the film outside of North America.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Freeloaders at AllMovie
Freeloaders at IMDb
Freeloaders at Rotten Tomatoes