Get Over It is a 2001 American teen comedy film loosely based on William Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream about a high school senior who desperately tries to win back his ex-girlfriend by joining the school play she and her new boyfriend are performing in, against the advice of friends. The film was directed by Tommy O'Haver for Miramax Films and written by R. Lee Fleming Jr.. The film was released on March 9, 2001, and stars Ben Foster, Kirsten Dunst, Melissa Sagemiller, Sisqó, Shane West, Colin Hanks, Zoe Saldana, Mila Kunis, Swoosie Kurtz, Ed Begley Jr., Carmen Electra and Martin Short. The film grossed $19 million against a budget of $22 million.


== Plot ==
Berke Landers and his girlfriend, Allison, were the quintessential high-school couple who grew up together and eventually fell in love, but she breaks up with him immediately after the film begins. This leads to an opening musical number of "Love Will Keep Us Together" lip-synced by Vitamin C, imagined by Berke. He seeks advice from his embarrassing parents Frank and Beverly Landers, who are hosts of a relationship advice show called Love Matters, but they don't help with the situation by instead focusing on his sex life. Allison then starts a relationship with Striker, a "foreign" student who was once the lead singer of a boy band called the Swingtown Lads. When Allison and Striker audition for the school's upcoming musical, Berke desperately tries to win Allison back by also auditioning for the play, despite having no theatrical talent and having a busy schedule as a member of the basketball team. Meanwhile, Berke's friends Felix and Dennis try to find a new girlfriend for him.
With the help of Felix's younger sister, Kelly, a talented songwriter and singer who's is in love with him, Berke wins a minor role in the play, a modern musical version of Shakespeare's comedy A Midsummer Night's Dream called A Midsummer Night's Rockin' Eve, written and directed by the school's domineering drama teacher, Dr. Desmond Oates (Martin Short). Striker plays Demetrius, Allison plays Hermia, Kelly plays Helena, and Lysander is to be played by the school's star actor, Peter Wong. But after Peter is injured in a freak accident, Striker nominates Berke to take over the role of Lysander, and, still intent on winning Allison back, Berke accepts. He gradually improves with continuing assistance from Kelly, but remains unaware of the growing attraction between the two of them. While searching through props backstage, Kelly accidentally shoots Berke in the arm with an arrow gun, thinking it's a prop. Meanwhile, Oates blames Kelly's singing for his own poorly written song and rejects her suggestions to improve it.
Felix and Dennis set Berke up on a date with Dora, a very attractive but accident-prone woman. The date ends horribly when Dora inadvertently causes a fire in the restaurant. Later, the boys try again to get Berke's mind off things by taking him to an underground sex club. However, their attempts fail when Berke is locked into a harness and whipped by a dominatrix. The night ends with  Felix and Dennis abandoning Berke after the police raid the club, who is then picked up by his parents. Much to Berke's chagrin, his parents congratulate him on his seemingly kinky sexual tastes.
At a party thrown by Felix at Berke's house, Kelly kisses Berke, but he insists that a relationship between them could not work because she is Felix's sister. She leaves him, annoyed at his unwillingness to move on with his life, and Felix, coming across the two, punches Berke. At the same party, Berke and Allison catch Striker cheating on Allison with her best friend Maggie, and so Allison breaks up with Striker. Meanwhile, Frank and Beverly return home to find the party and once again congratulate Berke. Berke lambastes them for constantly embarrassing him and not acting like normal parents would in these types of situations.
On the play's opening night, the first half of the performance goes smoothly except for some onstage scuffling between Berke and Striker. During the intermission, Allison confides to Berke that she wants to get back together with him, leaving him with a difficult choice between her and Kelly. Meanwhile, Striker bribes two of the theater technicians to try and blow Berke off the stage using stage pyrotechnics. Before the play resumes, Felix gives the orchestra sheet music for a love ballad written by Kelly to replace Oates' unpopular tune.
After the curtain rises, Kelly sings her song so beautifully that Berke is reminded of their time together and finally realizes he loves her. As the fourth act begins, he abandons his lines from the script and makes up his own verse professing his character's love for Kelly's character Helena. The audience applauds as Berke and Kelly kiss. Striker protests this change, but unwittingly signals the technicians to set off the explosion, blowing him offstage and into the orchestral section, sending Dora flying into the air. Felix catches her and they become a couple. Dennis kisses Kelly's friend and his dancing partner Basin, who kisses him back, suggesting that they also begin a relationship. Kelly and Berke leave the theatre after the show that was directed by Allison Wruk & Matt Doss, looking forward to their future together as they discuss the next night's performance. The film ends with Sisqó and Vitamin C singing and dancing along with the cast to the song "September" as the credits roll.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
Get Over It was filmed in Ontario, Canada. Filming began on June 1, 2000, and ended August 2, 2000, lasting 63 days. Scenes that took place in high school were filmed at Port Credit Secondary School. Other locations in Ontario included Mississauga, Toronto and Port Credit. Co-stars Kirsten Dunst and Ben Foster dated from late 2000 to early 2001. Late singer and actress Aaliyah was considered to play the role of Maggie in the film, but the part was given to Zoe Saldana. Singer and actor Sisqó appeared


== Release ==
The film was released in the US on March 9, 2001, by Miramax. The film then opened in the UK on June 10, 2001, by Momentum Pictures, and in Australia on September 6, 2001, by Buena Vista International.


=== Home media ===
The film was released on DVD & VHS in the US by Miramax Home Entertainment on August 14, 2001, and in the UK by Momentum Pictures on April 1, 2002. Special features include a commentary track with director Tommy O'Haver & screenwriter R. Lee Fleming Jr., deleted & extended scenes with optional commentary, original songs, outtakes with Martin Short, a makeup test also with Short, two music videos including "The Itch" by Vitamin C and an original song titled "Love Scud" by fictional boy band "The Swingtown Lads" and a behind-the-scenes featurette. The film was re-released on DVD on May 15, 2012, by Echo Bridge Home Entertainment, as part of a deal with Miramax, and contains no special features or subtitle tracks.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Get Over It received mixed reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 44% based on reviews from 63 critics, with an average score of 5.00/10. The site's consensus states: "As with most teen movies, Get Over It is entirely predictable, and there's not enough plot to sustain the length of the movie. However, it is not without its charms." On Metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 52 out of 100 based on 14 reviews.Mich La Salle San Francisco Chronicle gave the film a positive review and wrote: "Breaks the formula for teen romances. Martin Short, as the vain and zany drama teacher, does not disappoint."
Eddie Cockrell of Variety magazine gave a mixed review, describing the film as "A mildly diverting, largely inoffensive teen laffer that's long on cartoonish high school hijinks but short on dramatic concentration and crucial story details."
Ernest Hardy of L.A. Weekly gave the film a negative review and called the film a "lobotomized updating of A Midsummer Night's Dream".


=== Box office ===
The film opened at #7 in 1,742 screens and in the North American box office with $4,134,977. The film began to drop down and closed after five weeks. The film grossed $11,576,464 overall in the US. The film opened in the UK box office on June 10, 2001, in 339 screens, earning £887,133 by the end of the weekend. The film earned £4,972,797 in the UK. By the end of its run, the film earned $8,323,902 in foreign markets. Based on a $22 million budget, Get Over It earned $19,900,366 worldwide, making it a box office failure.


== Music ==


=== Soundtrack ===


=== Featured music ===
Other music featured in the film but are not on the soundtrack include:

"Happiness (The Eat Me Edit)" - Pizzaman
"Magic Carpet Ride (Matt Philly Remix)" - The Mighty Dub Katz
"Champion Birdwatchers" - LA Symphony
"Love Scud" - The Swingtown Lads
"Morse" - Nightmares on Wax
"A Little Soul (Lafayette Velvet Revisited Mix)" - Pulp
"Reach Inside" - Boh Samba
"Phthalo Blue" - The Fairways
"The Itch" - Vitamin C
"Get On It (Krafty Kuts Latin Funk Mix)" - Resident Filters
"Pass It On" - Keoki
"September" - Sisqó & Vitamin C


== References ==


== External links ==
Get Over It at IMDb
Get Over It at AllMovie
Get Over It at Box Office Mojo
Get Over It at Rotten Tomatoes
Get Over It at Metacritic