God's Not Dead: A Light in Darkness is a 2018 American Christian drama film written and directed by Michael Mason. It is the third installment of the God's Not Dead series, following the 2014 film God's Not Dead and its 2016 sequel. It stars David A. R. White, John Corbett, Shane Harper, Benjamin Onyango, Ted McGinley, Jennifer Taylor, Tatum O'Neal, Shwayze and Cissy Houston.The film follows the trilogy's Christian persecution complex theme, and is loosely based on the story of five pastors in Texas who were issued subpoenas for sermons due to potential violation of the Johnson Amendment. Unlike in the film, in reality the subpoenas were soon dropped: since 2008 only one of more than 2,000 mainly evangelical Christian clergy deliberately violating the law has been audited, and none punished.Principal photography was completed in Little Rock, Arkansas in December 2017. It was released in the United States on March 30, 2018, and received generally unfavorable reviews from critics. The film made less in its entire theatrical run ($7.4 million) than each of the previous two grossed in their respective domestic opening weekends ($9.7 million and $7.6 million). However, it brought the cumulative gross of the God's Not Dead film series to $96.6 million worldwide.


== Plot ==
After Rev. David Hill is released from prison (as seen in the previous film), controversy is sparked against Dave's St. James Church, which is on college campus grounds. This causes the college to start the process of shutting down the church, much to the dismay of Dave and his friend Jude. When informed of the decision to shut down the church and to replace it with a building to expand the school, Dave and Jude begin the process of suing the college to save St. James. Things get worse when college student Adam Richertson, in protest, tosses a brick into the church, igniting a fire that kills Jude and nearly destroys the church. Dave is forced to come to grips with the loss of his friend. Adam is horrified by his actions and contemplates whether to confess to the crime, leading him to reconnect with his skeptical girlfriend, Keaton.
During the lawsuit against the school, Dave enlists the help of his estranged brother, attorney Pearce Hill, who tries to explain to Dave that it is not a case worth fighting for. Dave refuses to listen to his brother's advice and continues the case into court. After failing to reach a settlement with the college, the trial date is set for the lawsuit. At the same time, Adam sends an anonymous text to Dave, confessing to the church fire, causing a furious Dave to assault him when confronting him. This severely wounds his lawsuit's case and leads to Adam being arrested and charged as a felony case.
After seeking God's help in church through prayer, Dave eventually realizes that his case has only made things worse and that St. James is not the right church for God and his followers. He drops his lawsuit, reaches an out-of-court settlement with the college, and after talking with a repentant Adam and consulting with Jude's family, ultimately asks to have the criminal charges against Adam dropped. Dave then announces to his college protesters that while St. James will be torn down, he will reopen a new church not far from the school.


== Cast ==
David A. R. White as Rev. Dave Hill, the Pastor of St. James Church
John Corbett as Pearce Hill, Dave Hill's estranged brother who is an atheist
Shane Harper as Josh Wheaton, a former college student who stood up to Professor Radisson in the first film, now a campus minister
Ted McGinley as Thomas Ellsworth, chancellor and a lead board member of Hadleigh University.
Jennifer Taylor as Meg Harvey, owner of a local soup kitchen who helps Dave persevere
Benjamin Onyango as Rev. Jude Mbaye, a Ghanaian minister and Reverend Dave's friend.
Tatum O'Neal as Barbara Solomon, a board member of Hadleigh University.
Samantha Boscarino as Keaton Young, a student at Hadleigh University
Mike Manning as Adam Richertson, Keaton Young's boyfriend
Cissy Houston as lead choir vocalist
Shwayze as Teo, a friend of Keaton Young at Hadleigh University
Gregory Alan Williams as Rev. Roland Dial, a black baptist pastor
Jennifer Cipolla as Sydney, one of Keaton Young's friends
Newsboys as themselves


== Production ==
Principal photography took place in December 2017 around Little Rock, Arkansas. Its exact filming locations were on the University of Central Arkansas and Hendrix College campuses.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
In the United States and Canada, God's Not Dead: A Light in Darkness was released on March 30, 2018, alongside Acrimony and Ready Player One, and was projected to gross $4–6 million from 1,685 theaters in its opening weekend. It ended up debuting to just $2.6 million, finishing 12th at the box office and marking the lowest opening of the series. According to analysis of social media by Relish Mix the film suffered from being the third film of a trilogy and religious audiences saw the film as "a cash grab and not a movie promoting a Christian message anymore", and were more inclined to go to other faith-based films in theaters like I Can Only Imagine and Paul, Apostle of Christ. It fell 58% in its second weekend to $1.1 million, finishing 17th. By the end of its North American run the film grossed a total of $5.5 million, less than other two films grossed simply in their opening weekends ($9.7 million and $7.6 million, respectively).


=== Critical response ===
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 10% based on 20 reviews, and an average rating of 3.65/10. On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 33 out of 100, based on reviews from 9 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, though as with the second film, Deadline Hollywood noted that "faith-based films have an easy time gaining an A on CinemaScore".Josh Terry of the Deseret News gave the film a mixed review, and wrote that it "means well, but it needs to drop the editorializing, streamline its story and let its message stand on its own."Owen Gleiberman of Variety gave it a mixed review and wrote, "It's my observation that critics tend to bash faith-based films a little too reflexively, and this one, taken on its own terms, isn't bad in a TV-movie-fodder-as-parable way." Gleiberman wrote positively about the brotherly relationship at the core of the story, praising Corbett for his performance.Writing for Vox, Alissa Wilkinson classifies the entire film series as being about Christian persecution complex theme, with particular criticism of how A Light in the Darkness distorts the truth surrounding the real court cases it name-checks.The A.V. Club included the film on its list of the worst of the year.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
God's Not Dead: A Light in Darkness at IMDb