Gun Shy is a 2000 film written and directed by Eric Blakeney, and starring Liam Neeson, Oliver Platt and Sandra Bullock.


== Plot ==
Charlie Mayough (Liam Neeson) is an undercover DEA agent suffering from anxiety and gastrointestinal problems after a bust goes wrong. During the aforementioned incident, his partner was killed and he found himself served up on a platter of watermelon with a gun shoved in his face just before back-up arrived. Charlie, once known for his ease and almost "magical" talent on the job, is finding it very hard to return to work. His requests to be taken off the case or retired are denied by his bosses, Lonny Burke (Louis Giambalvo) and Dexter Helvenshaw (Mitch Pileggi) as so much time was put into his cover. Charlie works with the dream of one day retiring to Ocean Views, a luxury housing complex with servants and utilities.

During his flight to New York, where his job will resume, another passenger strikes up a conversation with him. It turns out that this man, Dr. Jeff Bleckner (Michael Mantell), is a psychiatrist and upon arriving to New York, Charlie enlists his services. Dr. Bleckner listens to his troubles and prescribes him anti-anxiety medication to help him deal with stress. He also encourages him to join a group therapy session. At therapy, Charlie meets and befriends a group of stressed out men from the business world.

To deal with his gastrointestinal issues, Charlie goes to the doctor where he meets the free-spirited and beautiful Judy Tipp (Sandra Bullock), the self-proclaimed "Enema Queen" who introduces him to alternative therapies to his problems as well as some romantic interest.

Back on the job, Charlie is knee-deep in negotiations for high-stakes money laundering and stock manipulation. He was brought into the group by the passionate Fidel Vaillar (José Zúñiga) and his close bodyguard, Estuvio Clavo (Michael DeLorenzo).  Vaillar is a son of an important Colombian druglord and fears being viewed as a stereotype. They are dealing with an intense man with an unpredictable temper named Fulvio Nesstra (Oliver Platt) who represents the Italian mob in New York. Fulvio is the disfavored son-in-law of high-ranking Italian mobster, Carmine Minetti (Frank Vincent). Jason Cane (Andrew Lauer), a young Wall street-type with a plan, but poor taste, completes the group.  Each thinks he understands the other players, but there is more to these characters than meets the eye.


== Cast ==
Liam Neeson as DEA Agent Charlie Mayough
Oliver Platt as Fulvio Nesstra
Sandra Bullock as Judy Tipp
José Zúñiga as Fidel Vaillar
Michael DeLorenzo as Estuvio Clavo
Andrew Lauer as Jerry M. Feinstein / Jason Cane
Mary McCormack as Gloria Minetti-Nesstra
Mitch Pileggi as DEA Agent Dexter Helvenshaw
Louis Giambalvo as DEA Agent Lonny Burke
Rick Peters as DEA Agent Bennett
Dusty Kay as DEA Agent Kapstein
Jerry Stahl as Lucien
Michael Weatherly as DEA Agent Dave Juniper
David Carpenter as SEC Agent Cohler
Tommy Morgan Jr. as SEC Agent Harris
Roy Buffington as FBI Agent Clemmens
Hank Stratton as DEA Agent Josh
Frank Vincent as Carmine Minetti
Frankie Ray as Joey
Taylor Negron as Cheemo Partelle
Joe Maruzzo as Warren Ganza
Manny Perry as Cheemo's Bodyguard
Richard Schiff as Elliot
Paul Ben-Victor as Howard
Gregg Daniel as Jonathan
Ben Weber as Mark
Michael Mantell as Dr. Jeff Bleckner
Tracy Zahoryin as Jason's Girlfriend
Michelle Joyner as Elliott's Wife
Myndy Crist as Myrna
Stacey Hayes as Hot Girl (uncredited)


== Production ==
The film was produced by Bullock's production company, Fortis Films, and was the first film directed by Blakeney. Buena Vista Film Sales acquired and financed the film and it was distributed through Hollywood Pictures.


== Critical reception ==
Elvis Mitchell of The New York Times was not enamored with the direction, but was fond of the writing and acting.

The direction is proficient, but Mr. Blakeney has made his job look easy by shaping such a fine script. Good material certainly does a lot of the work. It gives the actors something to respond to, and they rise to the challenge."
Other reviewers were not so kind and it received a score of 26% on Rotten Tomatoes based on 43 reviews, the consensus of which states: "[while] a dark comedy of the low brow nature [Gun Shy is] filled with fart and gay jokes." However, the film managed to get a normalized score of 42 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 20 reviews.


== Soundtrack ==
The soundtrack was released on February 4, 2000 by Hollywood Records.

Blue Skies for Everyone - Bob Schneider
Under the Sun - Big Kenny
Drunk is Better Than Dead - The Push Stars
Round & Round - Bob Schneider
This Time - Los Lobos
Is It Too Late? - World Party
More Than Rain - Tom Waits
It's a Man's Man's Man's World - James Brown
Staysha Brown - The Scabs
I'm Your Boogie Man - KC and the Sunshine Band
Start the Commotion - The Wiseguys
Caro Mio Ben - Helga Bullock


== References ==


== External links ==
Gun Shy at IMDb
Gun Shy at AllMovie