Horrid Henry: The Movie is a 2011 British 3D children's musical adventure comedy film, directed by Nick Moore and produced by Allan Niblo, Rupert Preston, Mike Watts and Lucinda Whiteley, who wrote it. In the film, Henry and the Purple Hand Gang fight to prevent the closure of their school by an evil private school headmaster. It is based on the fictional character Horrid Henry from the children's book series of the same name by Francesca Simon. The film itself acts as a prequel to Series 3 of the TV Series.
Horrid Henry: The Movie stars Theo Stevenson, Richard E. Grant, Parminder Nagra, Kimberley Walsh, Mathew Horne, Siobhan Hayes, Dick and Dom, Noel Fielding, Jo Brand and Anjelica Huston. It was the first British film for children to be shot in 3D, and was officially released in cinemas on 29 July 2011 in 2D, RealD 3D, and 3D formats by Vertigo Films in the United Kingdom. The movie is now aired on Netflix.
Phase 4 Films and Entertainment One released the film in theatres in the United States and Canada on 22 December 2012. The film has an approval rating of 9% on Rotten Tomatoes and grossed $10.1 million worldwide. Horrid Henry: The Movie was released on DVD and Blu-ray on 28 November 2011 in the United Kingdom. Horrid Henry: The Movie has sold over 750,000 DVD copies in the UK.Horrid Henry: The Movie aired on Nicktoons in October 2019. The film had a share of 9.2% and ranked number 1 in its time slot. The film has 4.5 stars out of 5 on Amazon Prime.


== Plot ==
Horrid Henry uses his magnetic yoyo to steal cookies from Moody Margaret's Secret Club. Before he can eat them, his mother tells him to do his homework. The next morning, Henry searches for his homework, only to find that after he left it on the dining room table, the other members of the household variously spilled milk on it, stepped on it, and squashed it into the couch, leaving it a mess.
He leaves it behind and has his friend Brainy Brian forge a note from his mother saying his cat ate it. His teacher, Miss Battle-Axe, realizes that this note is forged and that Henry did not do it himself, since Brian spelled "homework" correctly, something Henry is incapable of doing. With Henry in detention, his friends join him to practice for a talent contest. Miss Oddbod, the headteacher, and a pair of school inspectors walk in on their rehearsal.
Vic Van Wrinkle, headteacher of the exorbitantly expensive Brick House School, has been bribing the school inspectors to put pressure on Ashton Primary, the school Henry attends, in order to justify closing the school. Van Wrinkle stands to make a fortune from the resulting influx of pupils. Horrid Henry and Moody Margaret's misbehavior prompts Miss Oddbod to fire Miss Battle-Axe and Miss Lovely for failing to enforce discipline, and the school inspectors encourage Henry's pranks.
With Ashton Primary on the brink of closing, Henry's Great Aunt Greta volunteers to put up the money to transfer Henry to an all girls school (since she thinks Henry is a girl) and his younger brother Peter to Brick House. Miss Lovely gets a job at Brick House, where she notices the school inspectors. Peter distracts the staff and pupils by performing numerous arrangements of "Frère Jacques" so that Miss Lovely can spy on Van Wrinkle and the inspectors. She is caught by Van Wrinkle, but covertly passes notes about his plan to Peter.
Meanwhile, Henry's new schoolmates immediately realize he is a boy and begin hunting him. Margaret, who has also been transferred to the school, comes to Henry's aid, and the two escape. The traumatic experience motivates them to work together to save Ashton Primary. Henry decides to win the talent contest with his Zero Zombies band, hoping that this will make them famous enough that they won't shut the school down. 
After the band wins the contest, Miss Oddbod informs Henry that fame is irrelevant in this case. Henry is later invited to a game show known as 2 Cool 4 School, with the intention of using the prize money to bribe the school inspectors to leave Ashton Primary alone. In the final round of the competition, he is confronted with Miss Battle-Axe, who challenges him to spell "homework." Recalling Miss Battle-Axe's early admonitions and using "Oh Henry, you horrid boy" as a mnemonic device, he correctly spells "homework" with two "o"s for the first time.
Meanwhile, Peter and his friends try to rescue Miss Lovely, but are captured by Van Wrinkle. Miss Lovely tricks him into explaining his plan while Peter has her mobile phone call the school so that Miss Oddbod can hear. Miss Oddbod calls the police and Van Wrinkle attempts to escape, but falls over due to Peter tying his shoelaces together and is later arrested. Henry returns and offers the cash prize to Miss Oddbod, who declines it and explains that the school has already been saved. At Margaret's suggestion, the money is instead used for a large party.


== Cast ==
Theo Stevenson as Horrid Henry
Richard E. Grant as Vic Van Winkle
Parminder Nagra as Miss Lovely
Mathew Horne as Henry & Peter’s Dad
Noel Fielding as Ed Banger
Prunella Scales as Great Aunt Greta
David Schneider as Soggy Sid
Siobhan Hayes as Henry & Peter’s Mum
Helen Lederer as Rich Aunt Ruby
Rebecca Front as Miss Oddbod
Kimberley Walsh as Prissy Polly
Anjelica Huston as Miss Battle-Axe
Scarlett Stitt as Moody Margaret
Ross Marron  as Perfect Peter
Lloyd Howells as Rude Ralph
Jack Sanders as Aerobic Al
Connor O'Mara as Beefy Bert
Reuben Lee as Brainy Brian
Billy Kennedy as Weepy William
Helena Barlow as Sour Susan
Nikita Mistry as Gorgeous Gurinder
Ela Warburton as Lazy Linda
Nethra Tilakumara as Singing Soraya
Metin and Timur Ahmet as the School Inspectors
Dick and Dom as themselves
Frank Kauer as Spotless Sam
Joshua-James Thomas as Goody Goody Gordon
Gabriel Werb as Tidy Ted
Tyger Drew-Honey as Stuck-up Steve
Tamsin Heatley as Miss Impatience Tutu and Fang the Hamster.
Philip Pope as Moody Margaret's Dad
Kia Pegg as Vicious Vicky
Grant Logan as Wheely Walter
Lily and Sasha Demetriou Ottaway as Vomiting Vera
Elizabeth Waterworth-Santo as Nitty Nora.
Waterworth-Santo also reprises her voice of Henry from the TV series during the song "When I'm King".


== Soundtrack ==
The soundtrack was released on 1 January 2011, New Year's Day, by Universal Music TV.


== Release ==
Horrid Henry: The Movie was theatrically released on 29 July 2011, in the  U.K. by Vertigo Films.  It was later released on DVD and Blu-ray on 28 November, that same year, in the United Kingdom.


== Reception ==
The film opened at #5 in the box office in the United Kingdom with £1.3 million, in a Top 10 led by Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - Part 2 and Captain America: The First Avenger. It was knocked down the next week to #7, by Super 8 and Mr. Popper's Penguins.Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 2 out of 22 critics gave Horrid Henry: The Movie a positive review; the rating average is 3.62 out of 10. Common criticisms included the unfunny, juvenile humour, stuttering plot, and unimaginative use of stereoscopy. The bright colour palette was widely praised, but generally said to be wasted, given the overall low quality of the film.Leslie Felperin of Variety stated: 'Thinly scripted, even for a kidpic, but luridly colored enough to keep even nap needing tots (or parents) awake, this sophomore effort by Brit helmer Nick Moore (Wild Child) reps something of a waste of its impressive roster of supporting thespian talent, while its use of 3D is likewise less than imaginative.'Derek Adams offered the film mild praise in Time Out: "Horrid Henry is indelibly flawed and disorderly in tone but not devoid of rambunctious charm". When interviewed on Desert Island Discs by Kirsty Young, Horrid Henry book author Francesca Simon stated: 'I haven't seen it (the film)...I had nothing to do with it.'


== Sequel ==
In an interview with Novel Entertainment, aired out in January 2020 after the success of Horrid Henry: The Movie being aired on Nicktoons, executive producer Lucinda Whiteley said she was 'absolutely (working on a sequel)! And not just one but two sequels, as the story of how Henry ends up saving the world needs more than just 90 minutes!'


== See also ==
Horrid Henry
Horrid Henry (TV series)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website

Horrid Henry: The Movie at IMDb