How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days is a 2003 romantic comedy film directed by Donald Petrie, starring Kate Hudson and Matthew McConaughey. It is based on a short comic book of the same name by Michele Alexander and Jeannie Long.


== Plot ==
Andie Anderson (Kate Hudson) is a writer for the women's magazine Composure as the "How to", subject-matter expert. She is bored and wishes she could write about more serious topics such as politics, economics, religion, poverty; matters she wishes she was genuinely concerned with. After Andie's best friend Michelle (Kathryn Hahn) experiences yet another break-up, Andie is inspired to write a new article titled "How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days"; she will begin dating a fellow and in the end drive him away utilizing just the "exemplary slip-ups ladies make" while seeing someone.
Simultaneously, publicizing chief Benjamin "Ben" Barry (Matthew McConaughey) is taking a stab at a pitch to promote another precious stone mission. At the point when his supervisor interrogates Ben's information concerning sentiment, Ben wagers he could make any lady become hopelessly enamored with him in the event that he needed to. His manager acknowledges the wager and affirms that in the event that he can make any lady become hopelessly enamored with him before the forthcoming organization ball, in only 10 days, he will permit Ben to head the promoting for the new precious stone organization. Ben's adversary associates, Judy Spears and Judy Green (Michael Michele and Shalom Harlow), who was at Composure magazine before in the day and know about Andie's new task, set Ben up to have him pick Andie as the young lady to test his hypothesis on.
Ben and Andie meet and soon start their quests, neither revealing their true intentions. Andie works hard to drive Ben insane and make him break up with her in order to complete her article, but Ben continues to stick around in hopes of making her fall in love with him. Andie gets Ben knocked out in a movie theater by talking aloud while watching a chick flick, rapidly moves her things into his apartment, acts overly possessive and sensitive and clingy, ruins his boys' poker night for him and his friends, and takes him to a Celine Dion concert when he was under the assumption he was going to see a New York Knicks basketball game.
Ben stays with her despite everything, and after coming very close to breaking up they attend couples counseling, led by Andie's friend Michelle. They agree, as a solution to their problems, to visit Ben's family in Staten Island for the weekend. While vacationing together Ben and Andie begin to form a genuine bond, and upon arriving home Ben even refers to Andie as his girlfriend. Andie then tries to explain to her boss Lana (Bebe Neuwirth) that she cannot continue writing and publishing this article as she has "really got to know this guy", but Lana remains insistent upon it. Around the same time, Andie and Ben go to the company ball together where Ben's boss, Phillip (Robert Klein), meets Andie and tells Ben that he "met her, she loves you, you win".
Seeing Ben's good news, Judy and Judy are instantly envious and set about to ruin it for their co-worker. They tell his close colleagues, Tony and Thayer (Adam Goldberg and Thomas Lennon), that Andie knew about the bet all along and was playing along to help Ben win. Tony and Thayer then rush to Andie's side and beg her to keep quiet, when they do not realize she is still blissfully unaware of the bet. Almost simultaneously, Lana, who is unaware of Ben's role in Andie's "How To" article, reveals Andie's true intentions to Ben. Upon learning of Ben's bet, Andie attempts to humiliate Ben in front of everyone at the party, and the pair argue on stage.
They go their separate ways before Ben is shown Andie's article and encouraged to read it. She explains in it how she "lost the one person she ever fell for", and, when he hears she quit her job at Composure and is on her way to Washington, D.C. for an interview, he chases her taxi and stops her. Once he accuses her of running away, they reveal their true feelings for each other and the film ends with Ben instructing the taxi driver to return Andie's belongings to her home, and then they kiss.


== Cast ==
Kate Hudson as Andie Anderson
Matthew McConaughey as Benjamin Barry
Kathryn Hahn as Michelle
Annie Parisse as Jeannie
Adam Goldberg as Tony
Thomas Lennon as Thayer
Michael Michele as Judy Spears
Shalom Harlow as Judy Green
Robert Klein as Phillip Warren
Bebe Neuwirth as Lana Jang
Liliane Montevecchi as Mrs. DeLauer
Marvin Hamlisch as Himself (Cameo)


== Production ==
Gwyneth Paltrow and director Mike Newell were originally attached to the project but producer Lynda Obst was unable to get Newell to commit to a date and Paltrow went on to work on the film View from the Top.The yellow gown Kate Hudson wore in the movie was created by Carolina Herrera along with the film’s costume designer. The necklace she wears with the yellow gown is called, in the film, the "Isadora Diamond" named after Isadora Duncan. The 80-carat yellow diamond in the necklace was designed by Harry Winston and is worth $6 million. The apartment interiors were conceived by Yeadon born sculptor Zoë Waterman, who said she thought the characters should live in "spaces which I consider to be dream spaces. That is to say their apartments are as close as I've seen on screen to my dream apartment. I just said to myself 'where would I absolutely love to live in my wildest dreams?', and the whole design came together in about fifteen minutes."


== Release ==


=== Critical response ===
How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days received mixed reviews from critics. Metacritic gave the film a score of 45 out of 100, based on 31 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a rating of 42%, based on 150 reviews, with an average rating of 5/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "Matthew McConaughey and Kate Hudson are charming together, but they can't overcome How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days' silly premise and predictable script."


=== Box office ===
The film was released on February 7, 2003, and earned $23,774,850 in its first weekend. Its final gross is $105,813,373 in the United States and $71,558,068 internationally.


== References ==


== External links ==
How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days at IMDb
How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days at AllMovie
How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days at Box Office Mojo