I Spy (commonly styled I-SPY) is a 2002 American buddy spy comedy film directed by Betty Thomas, and starring Eddie Murphy and Owen Wilson. The film is based on the television series of the same name that aired in the 1960s and starred Robert Culp and Bill Cosby. The plot follows a spy and a famous civilian boxer who go undercover to prevent a gun runner from selling a stolen stealth bomber to the highest bidder.
The film was released in the United States on November 1, 2002. It received generally negative reviews from critics and grossed $60 million against its $70 million production budget.


== Plot ==
At Bureau of National Security headquarters, Special Agent Alex Scott is accosted by rival, Carlos, before his next mission's briefing. Scott has to recover a stolen fighter, the "Switchblade," sold to arms dealer Arnold Gundars. Gundars is sponsoring middleweight world boxing champion Kelly Robinson's next match to simultaneously auction the plane. The agency has contacted Robinson and assigned him to be a civilian cover for Scott's mission. Together they travel to Budapest, where Scott plans to penetrate Gundars' compound during a pre-fight party.
Arriving in Budapest, Robinson is kidnapped. During the interrogation Scott bursts in, frees him, and fights the kidnappers before revealing it was a test which Kelly passed by not divulging Scott's identity.
At Gundars' party, Robinson replaces Gundars' pen with a duplicate with a tracking device before confronting his European challenger in the party's boxing ring as a diversion. Scott, posing as a member of Robinson's entourage, enters Gundars' private office and hacks his computer. Robinson unexpectedly arrives, tripping an alarm. They are forced to escape and manage to evade their pursuers by hiding in the sewer.
Returning to base, Robinson helps Scott seduce Agent Rachel Wright by feeding him lines from the Marvin Gaye song "Sexual Healing". Scott succeeds, but is interrupted by movement on the pen tracking device. He tracks Gundars to a bathhouse, which Scott believes is a dead end. Robinson has a hunch that the plane is hidden in the building, leading the two into a fight with Gundars' men. Gundars speeds off in his car, with Wright in pursuit. Her car explodes and Scott blames Robinson for her death. They engage in a public confrontation that leads to Robinson's arrest. Scott convinces BNS to continue the operation and tracks Gundars down again.
Robinson reaches the arena just in time for his fight. Scott finds Gundars with terrorists, busy fitting the plane with a nuclear missile. Scott surprises them, forcing a surrender, before being disarmed by double Agent Wright. She tortures Scott for the Switchblade's activation codes. Scott activates the contact lens gadget, allowing Robinson to see the dilemma as he battles his opponent in the ring. Robinson gets knocked down for the first time in his career, but recovers, defeats his opponent, and departs for the bridge.
Robinson sets off a firefight, killing many of the terrorists. After Carlos lands by parachute, Robinson infers that Carlos is also corrupt. When Carlos provokes Kelly, he knocks him out. Robinson shoots the remaining terrorists, while their leader, Zhu Tam, and Gundars are both killed by Wright. After the bomb on the plane is destroyed, Robinson tells Rachel to put the gun down. Wright makes up a lie that the BNS suspected that Carlos was corrupt and says that they pretended to team up with Carlos so they can catch him and uses this to convince the others that she is innocent. The confusion leads to a fight between Scott and Carlos, allowing Wright to escape with Gundars' briefcase. Scott and Robinson attempt to fly the Switchblade away, but it crashes into the river. While in the water, Robinson discovers the nuclear weapon. Scott realizes the mission is a success after all, and Robinson remarks that he will be recognized as a hero.
Later, Scott and Robinson track down and arrest Agent Wright in Monte Carlo. Scott finds a copy of USA Today with a picture of Carlos in a parade with President Bush. Robinson takes this news hard,  refusing to accompany Scott to BNS headquarters for a mission debrief. Scott tells Robinson the agency has perfected a jelly-like substance that will allow its wearer to float through the air. Robinson happily agrees to go, and Scott tells another agent to get some jars of jelly and two parachutes.


== Cast ==
Owen Wilson as Special Agent Alex Scott
Eddie Murphy as Kelly Robinson
Famke Janssen as Special Agent Rachel Wright
Malcolm McDowell as Arnold Gundars
Gary Cole as Agent Carlos
Bill Mondy as Mack McIntyre
Phill Lewis as Jerry
Mike Dopud as Jim
Lynda Boyd as Edna
Dana Lee as Zhu Tam
Viv Leacock as T.J.
Crystal Lowe as Beautiful Girl
Darren Shahlavi as Cedric Mills
Gábor Demszky as Himself


== Release ==
Made on a $70 million budget, the film brought in $33.6 million domestically and $26.7 million internationally, for a total of $60.3 million worldwide. It was the third box office bomb of 2002 for Murphy, following Showtime and The Adventures of Pluto Nash.


== Reception ==
Rotten Tomatoes, a review aggregator, reports that 16% of 134 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review; the average rating was 4.1/10.  The site's critics consensus reads: "Insipid and mirthless, I Spy bares little resemblance to the TV series that inspired it."  Metacritic assigned the film a weighted average score of 35 out of 100, based on 31 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale.Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times rated it 2/4 stars and wrote, "This is a remake by the numbers, linking a halfwit plot to a series of standup routines in which Wilson and Murphy show how funny they could have been in a more ambitious movie."The film was nominated for three Razzie Awards: Worst Remake, Worst Actor for Eddie Murphy, and Worst Screen Couple for Murphy and Owen Wilson.


== References ==


== External links ==
I Spy at IMDb
I Spy at Rotten Tomatoes
I Spy at AllMovie