I Think I Love My Wife is a 2007 American romantic comedy film starring Kerry Washington, Chris Rock and Gina Torres.  Rock co-wrote the film with Louis C.K. and also directed and produced it. It is a remake of the 1972 French film Chloe in the Afternoon by Éric Rohmer.


== Plot ==
Richard Cooper is a happily married and successful man. He is content with his home life in suburban New York with his lovely wife Brenda, a teacher, and his two young children. There is one problem in his marriage: their sex life has stagnated, leaving Richard frustrated and sex-starved. While at work, he occasionally fantasizes about other women, but never acts upon his impulses.
An encounter with an attractive old friend, Nikki, suddenly casts doubt over his typically resilient self-control. At first she claims to just want to be his friend, but she begins to show up consistently at his Manhattan financial office just to talk or have lunch, which causes his boss, secretaries, and peers to view him with varying degrees of contempt. When Nikki begins to deliberately seduce Richard, he does not know what to do. Against his better judgment, he flies with her out of town for one day on an errand, where he is beaten by her boyfriend. Then he returns too late to make a sales presentation at an important business meeting, causing the loss of a lucrative contract. Later, when she and her fiancé are about to move to Los Angeles, Nikki asks Richard to come to her apartment later to say a "proper goodbye".  When he gets to Nikki's apartment, he finds her in her underwear in her bathroom. In the moments before it seems Richard will consummate his attraction to Nikki, he realizes how grave the loss of his wife and children would be, so he walks out on Nikki. Richard returns home, surprising his wife, and, for the first time in the film, they begin to rebuild a genuine rapport, with a possible promise of good things to come.


== Cast ==
Kerry Washington as Nikki Tru
Chris Rock as Richard Cooper
Gina Torres as Brenda Cooper
Steve Buscemi as George
Edward Herrmann as Mr. Landis
Welker White as Tracy
Samantha Ivers as Mary
Michael Kenneth Williams as Teddy
Orlando Jones as Nelson
Eva Pigford as Hope
Cassandra Freeman as Jennifer
Stephen A. Smith as Allan
Wendell Pierce as Sean
Milan Howard as Kelly Cooper
Roz Ryan as Landlady
Christina Vidal as Candy
Eliza Coupe as Lisa
GQ as White Rapper
Stephanie D'Abruzzo as Cafe Entertainer (uncredited)


== Production ==
Charles Stone III was slated to direct but dropped out.This is the second time Rock and Washington have been paired on screen. Previously they were in Bad Company, playing a couple.
Mumbai-based UTV Motion Pictures made its entry into the American market by co-producing the film.


== Reception ==
The film received generally negative reviews. Rotten Tomatoes reported a 19% approval rating, based on 105 critical reviews with the consensus "Chris Rock's comedic instincts are muted and the female characters are unsatisfactorily drawn in this uneven sex farce/domestic drama mashup." Metacritic reported that critics rated the film 49/100  based on 30 reviews. It grossed $5 million on its opening weekend, reaching #5. The film grossed a worldwide total of $13 million.


== DVD release and sales ==
The DVD was released on August 7, 2007, selling 214,778 units in the first week. At an aggregate, 863,437 units were sold which translated to revenue of $13,527,427.


== References ==


== External links ==
I Think I Love My Wife at AllMovie
I Think I Love My Wife at Box Office Mojo
I Think I Love My Wife at IMDb
I Think I Love My Wife at Rotten Tomatoes