Inappropriate Comedy (stylized as
inAPPropriate Comedy) is a 2013 American satirical sketch comedy film directed by Vince Offer. It stars Ari Shaffir (who also co-wrote), Rob Schneider, Michelle Rodriguez, Adrien Brody and Lindsay Lohan, and was released on March 22, 2013.The film was originally envisioned as a sequel to Offer's previous anthology, The Underground Comedy Movie, and called Underground Comedy 2010. Trailers for Underground Comedy 2010 were released to TV and the internet before the film being billed as Inappropriate Comedy. It is also a partial remake of Offer's previous film, recycling the sketches "Flirty Harry" and "Sushi Mama".


== Plot ==
The framing device has Vince Offer pressing buttons on his tablet computer that open offensive applications.
Psychology WorldA psychologist (Rob Schneider) has a session with a sex-obsessed young woman (Noelle Kenney) who wants to change. She shows him the pills that make her wild. He takes them and passes out on the floor.

Flirty HarryFlirty Harry (Adrien Brody) is a cop who, with a repertoire of double entendres, patrols the streets of San Francisco.

BlackassA Jackass spoof, where Vondell (Da'Vone McDonald), Murphay (Calvin Sykes), Swade (Thai Edwards), Darnell (Chalant Phifer), and Acquon (Ashton Jordaan Ruiz) are five African American guys who go about their days causing trouble.

The Porno ReviewJ.D. (Rob Schneider), Harriet (Michelle Rodriguez), and Bob (Jonathan Spencer) (who spends most of the time masturbating) host an At the Movies-style film review series that showcases pornographic films, including the dubbed Asian film "Sushi Mama" and a homosexual parody of Swan Lake known as Sperm Lake.

Things You'll Never SeeA beautiful young woman (Kiersten Hall) dating an old poor man (Anthony Russell).

Above the GrateLindsay Lohan stands on an air vent much like Marilyn Monroe's famous scene from The Seven Year Itch while a man (Vince Offer) watches her from underneath.

The Amazing RacistA spoof of The Amazing Race. Ari Shaffir and his cameraman go around the city showcasing extremely racist and offensive stereotypes against Asians, African Americans, Arabs, Hispanics and Jews. It is heavily implied that all of Shaffir's doings were not rehearsed and done to random people on the street.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
Lohan's scenes were shot in 2010 for Underground Comedy 2010, a production that would have mixed newly filmed sketches with sketches from the original 1997 production of The Underground Comedy Movie. The alcohol-detecting ankle monitor she was ordered to wear after she failed to show up for a court hearing is clearly visible as she stands on the street grate.
A trailer for Underground Comedy 2010 was released in August of that year. The project was eventually expanded to a fully new feature film with the production of additional new sketches. Ari Shaffir's segment mixed footage with unknowing collaborators and staged action, mostly using the same people brought back "to do a little extra so we can build a story or get me some comeuppance".The film is directed by Vince Offer, who also directed The Underground Comedy Movie and, between the two films, became better known for his infomercial sales pitches (his best known product being the ShamWow absorbent towel).


== Reception ==

InAPPropriate Comedy was called “worse than Movie 43” by Frank Scheck of The Hollywood Reporter. Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 0%, based on 5 reviews.At Metacritic, it holds a score of 1 out of 100, based on 5 reviews, meaning “overwhelming dislike”. It is tied with 10 Rules for Sleeping Around, Chaos, Bio-Dome, Not Cool, The Singing Forest, The Garbage Pail Kids Movie, Death of a Nation, Hardbodies, and United Passions as the worst reviewed film on the site.
Lohan was nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actress for her performance in the film (also for Scary Movie 5), but lost to Kim Kardashian for Temptation: Confessions of a Marriage Counselor.


=== Box office ===
The film earned $172,000 from 275 theaters, for a location average of $625 in its opening weekend.


== References ==


== External links ==
inAPPropriate Comedy at IMDb
inAPPropriate Comedy at Box Office Mojo
inAPPropriate Comedy at Rotten Tomatoes
inAPPropriate Comedy at Metacritic