Jackass: The Movie is a 2002 American comedy film directed by Jeff Tremaine. It is a continuation of the MTV television series Jackass, which had completed its run. It was produced by Lynch Siderow Productions and Dickhouse Productions. The film features most of the original Jackass cast, including leader Johnny Knoxville, Bam Margera, Ryan Dunn, Steve-O, Chris Pontius, Wee Man, Preston Lacy, Dave England, and Ehren McGhehey. MTV Films and Paramount Pictures released the film to theaters on October 25, 2002. It grossed over $79 million worldwide and received very mixed reviews from critics. It was followed by a sequel, Jackass Number Two.
An unrated version of the film was released in 2006, with a runtime of 87 minutes.


== Plot ==
Johnny Knoxville and his crazy friends appear on the big screen for the very first time in Jackass: The Movie. They wander around Japan in panda outfits, wreak havoc on a once civilised golf court, they even do stunts involving LIVE alligators.


== Stunt List ==
Rent-a-Car Crash-Up Derby - the team rent a Ford Contour which Johnny Knoxville then drives in a demolition derby event, before returning the wrecked car to the rental company.
Human Bowling - Bam Margera and Ryan Dunn skateboard in bowling lanes.
The Muscle Stimulator - Johnny Knoxville, Chris Pontius, Ehren McGhehey and Dave England try out electronic muscle stimulators, using them to zap each other with electric shocks.
Fatty Fall Down - Preston Lacy sits down on a bench that has been rigged to collapse, in front of passers-by.
Golf Cart Antics - Johnny Knoxville, Bam Margera, Ryan Dunn, and Brandon DiCamillo, take part in various stunts in golf buggies across a golf course, destroying them in the process.
Party Boy Japan - Chris Pontius, as Party Boy, strips off and dances in the middle of a Tokyo shopping centre.
Board Break - Wee Man attempts to break a wooden plank with his forehead.
Alligator Nipple Bite - Johnny Knoxville gets bitten on the nipple by a baby alligator.
Alligator Tightrope - Steve-O attempts to walk a tightrope across a zoo's alligator enclosure.
Fireworks Wake-Up - Bam Margera wakes up his parents, Phil and April Margera by letting off fireworks in their bedroom, and again in Phil's van when he sets out to go to work.
The Shoplifter - After Johnny Knoxville, Bam Margera, and Spike Jonze dress as an elderly man, Knoxville attempts to steal from a shop by hiding various items in his clothes.
Hardware Store Crap - Dave England defecates in a display toilet at a hardware store.
Clipper Cam - various members of the team and crew, including Johnny Knoxville, Bam Margera, and Mat Hoffman are subjected to surprise attacks with hair clippers.
Mousetraps - Ehren McGhehey, dressed as a mouse, has to negotiate his way through hundreds of mousetraps to reach the "cheese".
The Bungee Wedgie - Raab Himself jumps from a tree, suspended by his underpants from a bungee cord.
Riot Control Test - Johnny Knoxville is shot in the stomach with a "less-lethal" projectile designed to control rioters.
The Big Cone - Wee Man hides under a giant plastic road cone and sets off around busy Tokyo streets.
No Brakes - Spike Jonze, in an old man suit, flies down a city street in a motorized wheelchair.
Ass Kicked by Girl - Ryan Dunn fights Japanese female kickboxer Naoko Kumagai.
Tropical Pole Vaulting - Steve-O pole-vaults into palm trees, into the sea from a pier, and into a filthy drainage channel.
Shopping Cart Attack - Ehren McGhehey gets hit in the side by a shopping cart, thrown by Chris Pontius.
Night Pandas - Johnny Knoxville, Steve-O, Ryan Dunn, Wee Man, Preston Lacy, and Loomis Fall dress up as pandas and set off into the bustling nightlife of Tokyo.
Rocket Skates - Johnny Knoxville attaches firework rockets to his roller skates.
Roller Disco Truck - The team, excluding Johnny Knoxville, get into the back of a truck for a roller disco complete with strobe lights and dry ice, while Preston Lacy drives the truck around a car park.
Wasabi Snooters - At a Japanese restaurant Steve-O attempts to snort wasabi hot sauce.
Oddly Shaped Sumo Wrestlers - Wee Man gets chased by Preston Lacy in sumo wrestler costumes.
The Gong - Johnny Knoxville and Rick Kosick sneak up behind unsuspecting members of the Japanese public with a giant gong.
Sick Of The Fan - Steve-O jumps on a mini-trampoline and destroys a ceiling fan.
April's Alligator - In an effort to make April Margera swear, an alligator is placed in the Margera house to scare her.
Wee Clippers - Dimitry Elyashkevich sneaks up on Wee Man and shaves his head.
The Handrail - Johnny Knoxville attempts to grind a long rail on his skateboard, with professional skaters Eric Koston and Clyde Singleton appearing in cameo roles.
Jacuzzi - Preston Lacy has a relaxing afternoon in the hot tub with a beer.
Paper Cuts - Ryan Dunn gives Johnny Knoxville and Steve-O papercuts in sensitive areas with an envelope.
The Fortune Teller - Party Boy gets his fortune told.
Sweaty Fat Fucks - Tony Hawk and Mat Hoffman join Bam Margera in fat suits for a skate and BMX session.
Grandpa Workout - Johnny Knoxville, in an old man suit, falls over attempting to lift weights.
Department Store Boxing - Boxer Butterbean takes on Johnny Knoxville, their boxing ring being the middle of a department store.
Sir Marcius - Brandon DiCamillo rides a bicycle into a convenience store, slamming into Bam Margera.
Fish Wank - Steve-O and Chris Pontius attempt to simulate masturbation after being told that sea cucumbers release white threads when startled.
Whale Shark Gummer - Steve-O and Chris Pontius fill their swimming trunks with shrimp and go diving to attract whale sharks.
Tidal Wave - Johnny Knoxville dons his snorkel and faces up to a huge man-made wave.
Back Tattoo - Steve-O shows off his back tattoo of himself.
Off-Road Tattoo - Jeff Tremaine gives Steve-O a tattoo of a smiley face on his arm in the back of a Humvee, with Henry Rollins driving it over rough ground at high speed.
The Merry-Go-Round - Ehren McGhehey is placed on a merry-go-round which is connected to a car motor, spinning it around uncontrollably fast. After Ehren gets up, his head is shaved by Dimitry Elyashkevich.
Ass Rockets - Steve-O and Chris Pontius develop new ways of launching fireworks.
BMX Tug-of-War - Ryan Dunn's BMX is anchored to Preston Lacy by a bungee rope.
Grandpa Falls Asleep - Spike Jonze, in an old man suit, pretends to fall asleep in traffic.
Yellow Snowcone - Ehren McGhehey ignores the old warning to never eat yellow snow, and is promptly attacked by Dave England.
Wee Kick - Wee Man kicks himself in the head.
Bathroom Beating - Bam Margera beats up Phil Margera while he's on the toilet.
Golf Course Airhorn - Johnny Knoxville, Ehren McGhehey, and Dave England hide in trees at the side of a golf course, armed with airhorns.
Mountain Lion Slap - Chris Pontius, in a koala costume, gets slapped in the face by a mountain lion.
The Burglars - Johnny Knoxville and Bam Margera's burglary of a diamond company goes terribly wrong.
Butt X-Ray - Ryan Dunn places a toy car into his anus, then goes to get an X-ray.
Son of Jackass - the team dress as elderly men for the apocalyptic ending sequence.


== "Failed ending" ==
In the ending of the film, Johnny Knoxville is launched from a catapult into a lake, where Rip Taylor sits in a boat, announcing that "this is the end." This is followed with the credits being shown over outtakes from the film. The original ending for the film was supposed to be a Rube Goldberg-type contraption, with each of the cast members performing a stunt that either has something to do with what they did on the show (for example, the first stunt would have Preston as "The Human Wrecking Ball", knocking him into a Port-A-Potty), or simply for a sight gag (such as Ehren being knocked over in the Port-A-Potty and landing on a bed of toilet paper rolls), ending with Johnny being launched off the catapult next to Rip Taylor.
However, as the entire contraption didn't work together the way they wanted it to, the producers of the film decided to try filming an alternate ending, which is how they came to film the "Son of Jackass" skit. The "Son of Jackass" skit involves all of the performers in "old man" costumes running around in exploding buildings and sheds, with only Steve-O surviving to proclaim "Yeah, dude." In the cast commentary, it is said that this is ironic as Steve-O is the least likely to even reach old age. Some bits of the failed ending were incorporated into the end credits montage, like Dave England dressed in a penis costume and the giant Plinko contraption.


== Cast ==
Johnny Knoxville
Bam Margera
Ryan Dunn
Steve-O
Wee Man
Chris Pontius
Preston Lacy
Dave England
Ehren McGheheyGuest appearances:

Loomis Fall
Stephanie Hodge
Brandon DiCamillo
Raab Himself
Rake Yohn
April Margera and Phil Margera
Jess Margera
Manny Puig
Jack Polick
Rip Taylor
Tony Hawk
Mat Hoffman
Mike Kassak
Naoko Kumagai
Butterbean
Clyde Singleton
Eric Koston
Jason "J2" Rasmus
Henry Rollins
George Hruska


== Cut out ==
Because of the sensitive nature of some stunts, as well as the possibility of legal action, some parts of the film had to be edited out. One example of this is in the "Riot Control Test" skit. In this skit, Johnny Knoxville is shot at with a beanbag projectile from a pump-action shotgun.
The first time Knoxville is shot at, it misses him making him extremely nervous. The scene was later edited out as, while the Jackass crew could waive civil liability, they could not waive criminal liability. Hence, should Johnny or any cast member have been killed or grievously injured as a result of a stunt, the producers of the film could be held liable on the grounds of negligent or reckless homicide or battery.
In addition, the final skit in the film called "Butt X-Ray" was edited to remove the insertion of the toy car into Ryan Dunn's anus, the reason being that displaying the insertion might have been considered pornographic or otherwise highly objectionable by the MPAA, and could have earned the film an NC-17 rating, severely limiting its distribution.


== Japanese version ==
Since some scenes of the film were shot in Tokyo, Japan, a special edited version was made and screened for Japanese audiences. Some bits were edited out for legal reasons (especially scenes showing people's faces without their consent); however, they were placed back in for the special DVD version.


== Home media ==
The film was released on DVD on March 25, 2003. The DVD includes 27 minutes of additional footage, outtakes and MTV’s “Making of Jackass: The Movie.


== Box office performance ==
The film had a budget of $5 million and was the number one film at the United States box office when it opened, grossing $22.8 million, revenue from 2,509 theaters, for an average of $9,073 per venue. The film fell to fourth place in its second weekend and dropped 44 percent to $12.7 million, expanding to 2,530 theaters and averaging $5,032 per theater. The ten day gross was $42.1 million. The film went on to gross $64.3 million in the United States alone, of which the opening weekend made up 35.43 percent of its final gross. It made $15.2 million in other countries, bringing the worldwide gross to $79.5 million.


== Reception ==
Rotten Tomatoes reports 49% of critics gave the film positive reviews based on 96 reviews while the average rating is 5.04/10. The critics consensus reads, "There's a good chance you'll be laughing hysterically at one stunt, but getting grossed out by the next one in this big screen version of the controversial MTV show." On Metacritic, the film has an average score of 42 out of 100 based on 14 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews."
Ebert & Roeper – Richard Roeper called it the "feel-sick movie of the year" and said the film is "a disgusting, repulsive, grotesque spectacle, but it's also hilarious and provocative. God help me, thumbs up." Ebert gave the film a low rating, but only barely, explaining his rating comes "somewhere between a thumbs down and a sort of 'waving over' recommendation.
The Austin Chronicle – Kimberly Jones gave the film 3 stars and said the film is the "feature-length rendering of jackass the MTV show, meaning no plot, no script, just wall-to-wall idiocy." Jones said "It's silly, often stomach-churning, but also awfully addictive, inspiring the same kind of vicarious adrenaline rush as Fight Club, with its 'I bleed, therefore I am'; he-man mentality." Jones also remarked, "Consisting of a steady clip of barely minutes-long gags...this piece of outré performance art defies typical movie conventions...but that shouldn't surprise, or even disappoint, anyone lining up for a ticket." Jones wrote "the query 'can I have one for jackass the movie please?' sort of implies you know what you're getting yourself into" and "all told, either you get it or you don't."
Chicago Tribune – film reporter Mark Caro gave the film 1 star out of 4 and called it "willful idiocy for idiocy's sake." Caro also said "there's one stunt that I bet none of these moronic daredevils would tackle: trying to say something intelligent about Jackass: The Movie." Caro also remarked, "Maybe the best way to look at Jackass: The Movie is as a piece of conceptual art. How far and low will these guys go? What's the pinnacle of pointlessness?" then concluded "I don't like conceptual art."
Deseret Morning News – Jeff Vice gave the film 1½ stars and said the 80-minute run time was too much. Vice described the film as "possibly the most irresponsible picture ever released by a major film studio."
Entertainment Weekly – Owen Gleiberman gave the film a "B" and said the film "provokes a suspense halfway between comedy and horror. I'm not sure if I enjoyed myself, exactly, but I could hardly wait to see what I'd be appalled by next." Gleiberman also said "In the movie version of the show that might just as well have been called America's Funniest Frat-House Hazing Rituals, the boys engage in infantile Candid Camera grossouts...but mostly, the happy masochistic stunts just keep coming", and also remarked, "it's difficult to reprimand Johnny Knoxville and his crew of merry sick pranksters when their principal pastime consists of dreaming up elaborate new ways to punish themselves."
Film Journal International – Ethan Alter, who admitted to having never seen an episode of the TV show, said "it would be easy for me to hold Jackass: The Movie up as a leading example of the decline of Western civilization." Alter said he was disturbed by "the film's, and by extension the audience's, cavalier attitude towards pain." Alter went on to say the film "deliberately defies any and all cinematic conventions", "there's no story or characters to analyze", and said "simply put, there's no movie to review here, just a series of blackout scenes you're either going to find supremely funny or incredibly idiotic." Alter also said the film "appears to be hailing the birth of a new reality genre: Call it "America's Most Sadistic Home-Videos"."
LA Weekly – film critic Paul Malcolm listed Jackass: The Movie as one of the 10 best films of 2002 and also called it the most underrated film of 2002.
Film Threat – Pete Vonder Haar said the results of "essentially transplanting the show to the big screen" are "incredibly funny and often too disgusting for words." Vonder Haar said "the masochists of Jackass aren't hurting anyone but themselves", "no one is exploiting these guys", and "Knoxville and Co. joyfully sacrifice their bodies for our amusement, and it works." Vonder Haar also remarked "the end result is a collection of some of the best physical comedy since Moe first smacked Curly on the head" and called it "one of the funniest films I've seen all year."
The Miami Herald – Rene Rodriguez gave the film 2½ stars out of 4 and said "Johnny Knoxville and his merry band of anarchists ran around performing the sort of suicidal stunts parental warnings were invented for" and "the gang also likes to train their sights on the unsuspecting public, Candid Camera style." Rodriguez also said "It is not at all sexist to suggest most women will find Jackass: The Movie as further evidence they are the more intelligent sex" and "As much as I laughed throughout the movie, I cannot mount a cogent defense of the film as entertainment, or even performance art, although the movie does leave you marveling at these guys' superhuman capacity to withstand pain (and their even stranger eagerness to suffer it)."
New York Post – film critic Lou Lumenick said "[this] plotless collection of moronic stunts is by far the worst movie of the year."
The New York Times – A.O. Scott said the film "is essentially an extended episode of the popular Jackass MTV series" and that "some of the undertakings, amateurishly recorded on video, are like demented science experiments." Scott said "Jackass the Movie is like a documentary version of Fight Club, shorn of social insight, intellectual pretension and cinematic interest" and also remarked, "Occasionally, there is a flicker of Candid Camera-style conceptual inventiveness, especially in the bits filmed in Japan."
The Village Voice – Ed Halter said "their feature debut plays like a longer episode of the show" and said "it's funny, as the old saying goes, because it's true." Halter wrote "the structure is ruthlessly efficient: no plot, no characters, no sets, and no downtime—just one sight-gag right after another."
Scott Foundas of Variety referred to Jackass: The Movie as the first reality film when reviewing The Real Cancun in April 2003.
In a film critic roundup of 2002 films in The Village Voice, film critic Armond White said "Best Documentary: Jackass, far and away."
Ed Halter of The Village Voice wrote, "MTV would surely love to claim Jackass as a mutant by-product of its Real World franchise, but its roots lie elsewhere", saying "their self-destructive brand of docu-comedy emerged as a bizarrely elaborate version of a skateboard-video mainstay: slam sections..."
Jennie Punter of The Globe and Mail said the film "belongs in the too-hot-for-TV direct-to-video/DVD category".This film won a Razzie Award for Most Flatulent Teen-Targeted Movie.


== Soundtrack ==

The soundtrack was released on October 25, 2002 by American Recordings. The soundtrack features songs that were featured in the movie, and various audio clips from the movie.


== Sequels ==
Jackass: The Movie was filmed with a modest budget of approximately $5 million, but earned more than $22 million during its opening weekend, effectively managing to secure the top spot at the box office for its debut. It eventually grossed more than $64 million in North America alone.
On September 22, 2006, Paramount Pictures released Jackass Number Two. A feature  titled Jackass 2.5 was compiled from outtakes shot during the making of the second film and released direct-to-DVD on December 26, 2007.
In December 2009, Paramount Pictures and MTV Films issued a press release that a second sequel titled Jackass 3D would be made. It was released on October 15, 2010. The movie was filmed in 3D starting in January 2010. Jackass 3.5 was compiled from outtakes shot during the making of the third film. The film was released in weekly installments on Joost from April 1 through June 13, 2011. The entire film was then released direct-to-DVD on June 14, 2011.
In December 2019, a third sequel, Jackass 4, was announced which is scheduled to be released on March 5, 2021, but was eventually delayed for July 2, 2021 and again to September 3, 2021. In April 2021 the movie was delayed again to October 22, 2021.


== References ==


== External links ==
Jackass: The Movie at IMDb
Jackass: The Movie at Rotten Tomatoes
Jackass: The Movie at Metacritic
Jackass: The Movie at Box Office Mojo
Jackass: The Movie at AllMovie