Jeepers Creepers 2 is a 2003 American horror-monster film written and directed by Victor Salva. A sequel to the 2001 film Jeepers Creepers, and the second installment in the Jeepers Creepers film series, it stars Jonathan Breck as the Creeper, a demonic creature and mysterious serial killer who pursues a school bus filled with highschool students. Ray Wise also stars as Jack Taggart, a man who seeks to avenge the death of his younger son, who had been taken by the Creeper that same week. Additionally, Francis Ford Coppola returned to the franchise as an executive producer.
Produced by Myriad Pictures and American Zoetrope, filming for Jeepers Creepers 2 took place in Tejon Ranch, and Long Beach, California. The film was theatrically released by United Artists in the United States on August 29, 2003, where it was met with mostly negative reviews from critics. With a $17 million budget, the film grossed $63.1 million worldwide and spawned a prequel, released as Jeepers Creepers 3 in 2017.


== Plot ==
On its twenty-second day of feeding, the Creeper abducts a young Billy Taggart in front of his father Jack and older brother Jack Jr. The next day, a school bus carrying a high school basketball team and cheerleaders suffers a blowout, after one of the tires is hit by a hand-crafted shuriken made of bone fragments. Later, cheerleader Minxie Hayes has a vision of Billy Taggart and Darry Jenner, another victim of the Creeper, who attempt to warn her about the Creeper, before he blows out another tire, disabling the bus. With the team stranded, the Creeper abducts bus driver Betty Borman and coaches Charlie Hanna and Dwayne Barnes. When the Creeper returns, he singles out six of the students: Dante Belasco, Jake Spencer, Minxie Hayes, Scotty Braddock, Andy "Bucky" Buck, and Deaundre "Double D" Davis. Minxie has another vision in which Darry says the Creeper emerges every twenty-third spring, for twenty-three days to eat humans, and she tells the other students.
After hearing several police reports, the Taggarts go hunting for the Creeper and soon make radio contact with the school bus. The Creeper attacks Bucky, but Rhonda stabs it through the head with a javelin. Dante begins prodding the Creeper’s wing, only for it to grab and decapitate him. The Creeper tears off its injured head and uses Dante’s severed head to replace its own. The students decide to leave the bus to find help, but the Creeper returns and chases them into a field, where it kills Jake and takes Scotty.
When the Creeper attacks Jonny, Chelsea, and Bucky on the bus again, the Taggarts arrive and Jack shoots it with a home-made harpoon, which the Creeper fights him off, managing to escape after flipping over the bus. Rhonda, Izzy Cohen, and Double D find a truck and attempt to escape but are chased by the Creeper again. Izzy pushes Rhonda out of the truck before causing the vehicle to crash, injuring both Double D and the Creeper, who loses an arm, a leg, and a wing, although Izzy crawls from the wreckage before the truck explodes. The Creeper continues to pursue Double D by leaping towards him and, when it has Double D pinned down, Jack shows up and shoots the Creeper in the head with the harpoon. He repeatedly stabs the Creeper in the chest but it goes into a hibernation state before it can die.
Twenty-three years later, a group of teenagers drives to the Taggart farm, where the Creeper is a sideshow attraction, called "The Bat Out of Hell", and the middle-aged Jack Jr. is charging entrance fees. They see an elderly Jack watching it with the harpoon at his side, and when they ask him if he is waiting for something, he looks up at the Creeper and says: "about three more days, give or take a day or two".


== Cast ==
Credits adapted from the British Film Institute.

Additionally, voice actor Bob Papenbrook appears as the man in the station wagon near the start of the film, while Marshall Cook, Joe Reegan, and Stephanie Denise Griffin star as the group seen at the end. Writer and director Victor Salva also makes a small, uncredited cameo appearance as the cover of a magazine briefly shown on the bus.


== Release ==


=== Box office ===
Jeepers Creepers 2 opened in 3,124 theaters and had a U.S. domestic gross of US$ 35,667,218. Other international takings were $27,435,448, and the worldwide gross was $63,102,666, slightly higher than the original.It displaced its predecessor, Jeepers Creepers, to become the new record holder for the highest ever Labor Day opening weekend four-day gross, holding the record until the 2005 release of Transporter 2.  After the 2020 Labor Day weekend, Jeepers Creepers 2 still holds the #6 spot with the #8 spot still held by Jeepers Creepers. Allowing for films that had been released prior to Labor Day, Jeepers Creepers 2 holds the #9 spot after the 2015 Labor Day four-day weekend.


=== Home video ===
On December 23, 2003, MGM released the film on VHS and DVD.


== Reception ==
Rotten Tomatoes, a review aggregator, reports that 24% of 127 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review; the average rating is 4.2/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "Jeepers Creepers 2 is competently made, but it doesn't have the scares of the original." Metacritic rated it 36/100 based on 29 reviews. Andy Klein of Variety wrote, "Few things are scarier than a sequel to a bad movie, but, in fact, Jeepers Creepers 2 is substantially better than its predecessor, even while staying strictly within the genre's well-defined boundaries."  Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter wrote, "The sequel has got the creepy bits down cold but lacks a fair share of scares."  Roger Ebert, writing for The Chicago Sun-Times, rated the film one out of four stars and said, "Victor Salva's Jeepers Creepers 2 supplies us with a first-class creature, a fourth-rate story, and dialogue possibly created by feeding the screenplay into a pasta maker."  In The New York Times, Dave Kehr wrote that creature lacks personality when the concept is retooled into a film series.  Gene Seymour of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the sequel lacks the mood of the first film, and the teen protagonists are too annoying to draw much of the audience's sympathy.  However, Seymour praised Wise's performance.  In a positive review, Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club called it "the rare sequel that's not only bigger than its predecessor, but also better".Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "C+" on an A+ to F scale.


=== Awards ===
Nomination – Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films
Nomination – Saturn Award Best Horror Film
Nomination – Motion Picture Sound Editors: Golden Reel Award Best Sound Editing in a Feature Film (David Bondelevitch and Victor Salva)


== Prequel ==
In September 2015, Jeepers Creepers 3 was officially greenlit. The film was slated to begin filming in April 2016 until production was halted when Victor Salva was boycotted from filming in Canada for his criminal past.The film was eventually released in a one-night-only showing on September 26, 2017, 14 years after the release of Jeepers Creepers 2. It grossed $2.3 million in theaters.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Jeepers Creepers 2 at IMDb
Jeepers Creepers 2 at Box Office Mojo
Jeepers Creepers 2 at Rotten Tomatoes
Jeepers Creepers 2 at Metacritic