Jonas Brothers: The 3D Concert Experience is a 2009 American concert film released in Disney Digital 3D, RealD 3D and IMAX 3D. It was released in the United States and Canada on February 27, 2009 with the release in other countries later on. The film stars Kevin, Joe and Nick Jonas of the American pop band, the Jonas Brothers, in their theatrical debut.


== Plot ==
The 3D Concert Experience follows the Jonas Brothers during their Burnin' Up Tour in a behind-the-scenes look at their busy schedule while in New York City, August 9–11, 2008. As part of their concert tour, they also go on a press tour, including interviews and television performances to promote the release of their third studio album, A Little Bit Longer and ending their day in Madison Square Garden. The film intercuts to concert performances off their self-titled second studio album and third studio album, filmed during their tour on July 13–14, 2008 in Anaheim. Performing alongside the Jonas Brothers are guest stars Demi Lovato on "This Is Me", Taylor Swift on "Should've Said No" and the brothers' bodyguard Robert "Big Rob" Feggans on "Burnin' Up". The film also debuted two new studio recordings, "Love Is On Its Way", which was filmed in Central Park, and "Live to Party", which would later serve as the theme song for their Disney Channel TV series.


== Cast ==
Main

Kevin Jonas - Guitar, backup vocals
Joe Jonas - Vocals, guitar
Nick Jonas - Guitar, vocals, drums, piano
Demi Lovato - Vocals
Taylor Swift - Vocals, guitar
Robert "Big Rob" Feggans - VocalsBand members

John Taylor - Musical director/guitar
Jack Lawless - Drums
Ryan Liestman - Keyboards
Greg Garbowsky - BassAdditional

Kevin Jonas, Sr.
Denise Jonas
Frankie Jonas


== Set list ==
"Lovebug" (instrumental) [intro]
"Tonight" (studio recorded vocals/live band in background) [opening credits]
"That's Just the Way We Roll"
"Hold On"
"BB Good"
"Goodnight and Goodbye"
"Video Girl"
"Gotta Find You"
"This Is Me" (with Demi Lovato)
"A Little Bit Longer"
"Play My Music" (studio recording)
"Hello Beautiful"
"Still in Love with You"
"Pushin' Me Away"
"Can't Have You"
"Should've Said No" (with Taylor Swift)
"Love Is On Its Way"
"S.O.S."
"Live to Party" (studio recording)
"Burnin' Up" (with Robert "Big Rob" Feggans)
"Tonight" (studio recording) [end credits]
"Shelf" (live performance) [end credits]


== Soundtrack ==

The film's soundtrack was released on February 24, 2009, three days before the film's release. It debuted at number #3 on the Billboard 200.


== Reception and box office ==
The film received mostly negative reviews from critics; it holds a 24% "Rotten" rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes based on 76 critics' reviews (15 fresh, 61 rotten). The consensus reads, "Jonas Brothers: The 3-D Concert Experience should please the brothers' adoring followers, but for non-converts, this concert film is largely flat and unenlightening." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 45 out of 100 based on 14 reviews. In general, critics panned the film for lacking appeal to any people outside the group's fan base. According to Box Office Mojo, it is the sixth highest-grossing concert film, out of six, following Justin Bieber: Never Say Never, Michael Jackson's This Is It, Hannah Montana and Miley Cyrus: Best of Both Worlds Concert (in which the Jonas Brothers had a guest star role), One Direction: This Is Us and Katy Perry: Part of Me.The film was nominated for a Teen Choice Award in 2009 for "Choice Movie: Music/Dance" and "Choice Music Album: Soundtrack". The film was also nominated for two Razzie Awards including "Worst Screen Couple" for the Jonas Brothers but they ended up winning "Worst Actor".


== Home media ==
The film was released on DVD and Blu-ray on June 30, 2009. In the US, the Blu-ray edition of the film includes the anagyph 3D version, with both one and two-disc DVD editions including only the 2D version of the film. However, for the UK and Australia DVD releases, Disney chose to release the film with the 3D version on DVD, as there was no Blu-ray release in either country.
Blu-ray Extended Edition
3D version of the film
Two performances not included in the theatrical release: "Can't Have You" and "A Little Bit Longer"
Extra songs included as bonus features: "Shelf" and "Lovebug"
Up Close and Personal: Behind the Scenes with the Jonas BrothersThe film was included as part of the release catalogue for the launch of the Disney+ streaming platform in November 2019, along with Hannah Montana and Miley Cyrus: Best of Both Worlds Concert. However, the film was not released in 3D and was renamed Jonas Brothers: The Concert Experience, much like the non-Blu-ray release of the concert film.


== See also ==
Jonas Brothers
Burnin' Up Tour
Demi Lovato
Taylor Swift
Camp Rock


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Jonas Brothers: The 3D Concert Experience at IMDb
Jonas Brothers: The 3D Concert Experience at AllMovie
Jonas Brothers: The 3D Concert Experience at Box Office Mojo
Jonas Brothers: The 3D Concert Experience at Rotten Tomatoes
Jonas Brothers: The 3D Concert Experience at Metacritic