Lackawanna Blues is a drama television film directed by George C. Wolfe and written by Ruben Santiago-Hudson. It aired on HBO on February 12, 2005. It is based on the play of the same name by Santiago-Hudson. Wolfe had commissioned the stage version. It is the true story of Ruben Santiago Jr. growing up in Lackawanna, New York. He was raised by his father and mother and the neighborhood boarding house lady known as Rachel "Nanny" Crosby. Ruben was born in 1956 to his Puerto Rican father Ruben Santiago and his African-American mother Alean Hudson. His mother was too mentally unstable to take good care of him; residing in mental hospitals, Alean disappears and reappears throughout Ruben's life. His father stayed at Nanny's boarding house, but he was frequently not around due to working long hours or out looking for work. Nanny more or less took care of Ruben Jr. as a mother figure. The television movie tells of his life growing up there and of the diverse characters that he meets during his and their stays at the boarding house.
For her work in the movie, S. Epatha Merkerson won a Best Actress Golden Globe, Screen Actors Guild, and Emmy Award in 2006.


== Cast ==
S. Epatha Merkerson as Rachel "Nanny" Crosby
Marcus Carl Franklin as Ruben Santiago Jr. as a boy, ages 7–10
Hill Harper as Ruben Santiago Jr. as an adult
Jimmy Smits as Ruben Santiago Sr., Ruben's father
Terrence Howard as Bill Crosby, Nanny's much younger husband
Mos Def as The Bandleader
Carmen Ejogo as Alean Hudson, Ruben's mother
Louis Gossett Jr. as Ol'lem Taylor, a retired Negro league baseball player
Macy Gray as Pauline, a resident and Jimmy's girlfriend
Michael K. Williams as Jimmy, a resident and Pauline's boyfriend
Ernie Hudson as Dick Barrymore, a cabaret owner
Delroy Lindo as Mr. Lucious, a resident
Rosie Perez as Bertha, a hairdresser and resident
Adina Porter as Ricky, a resident
Jeffrey Wright as Small Paul
Ruben Santiago Jr. as Freddie Cobbs, a World War II veteran
Saul Williams as Lonnie, a resident and War veteran
Liev Schreiber as Ulysses Ford, a social worker
Julie Benz as Laura, an abused wife
Patricia Wettig as Laura's Mother
Robert Bradley as Otis McClanahan (credited as "Robert A. Bradley" in some sources)
The blind Detroit street singer Robert Bradley from the band Robert Bradley's Blackwater Surprise also appears in the film. He performs on-screen and has three songs featured on the soundtrack (including a duet with Macy Gray).


== References ==


== External links ==
Lackawanna Blues at IMDb