London Has Fallen is a 2016 American action thriller film directed by Babak Najafi and written by Creighton Rothenberger, Katrin Benedikt, Chad St. John and Christian Gudegast. It is a sequel to Antoine Fuqua's 2013 film Olympus Has Fallen and stars Gerard Butler, Aaron Eckhart and Morgan Freeman, with Alon Moni Aboutboul, Angela Bassett, Robert Forster, Jackie Earle Haley, Melissa Leo, Radha Mitchell, Sean O'Bryan, Waleed Zuaiter and Charlotte Riley in supporting roles. It is the second installment in the Has Fallen film series. The film follows a plot to assassinate the world leaders of the G7 as they attend the British Prime Minister's funeral in London, and Secret Service agent Mike Banning's efforts to protect US President Benjamin Asher from being killed by the terrorists.
Filming began in London on October 24, 2014. A Christmas break started in November with filming resuming in February 2015. The film was released by Focus Features under their recently revived Gramercy Pictures label on March 4, 2016, and grossed $205 million worldwide. However, the critical reception was generally negative, with Variety accusing it of fear-mongering and "terrorsploitation" while The A.V. Club named it worst film of the year.
A third film, titled Angel Has Fallen, was released on August 23, 2019.


== Plot ==
G8 intelligence services locate arms trafficker and terrorist mastermind Aamir Barkawi (Alon Moni Aboutboul) at his compound, and authorize a US Air Force drone strike during his daughter's wedding, killing Barkawi's family and seemingly Barkawi himself.
Two years later, British Prime Minister James Wilson suddenly dies, and the G7 prepare to attend his funeral in London. Secret Service Director Lynne Jacobs (Angela Bassett) assigns agent Mike Banning (Gerard Butler) to lead American President Benjamin Asher's (Aaron Eckhart) overseas security detail, even though Banning's wife Leah (Radha Mitchell) is due to give birth in a few weeks. The entourage arrives via Air Force One at Stansted Airport, and Banning arranges an earlier arrival at Somerset House in London via Marine One.
As Asher's Presidential State Car arrives at St Paul's Cathedral, a group of mercenaries led by Barkawi's son Kamran (Waleed Zuaiter) launch coordinated attacks on the city disguised as Metropolitan Police, the Queen's Guardsmen, and other first responders, killing five Western leaders, damaging major landmarks and generating mass panic. Asher's early arrival throws off the St. Paul's attack, and Banning returns him and Jacobs to Marine One. The terrorists destroy the helicopter's escorts with Stinger missiles, forcing the damaged helicopter to crash-land in Hyde Park. Fatally injured, Jacobs makes Banning promise to stay alive for his unborn child, and to punish those responsible for the attack. Banning escorts Asher into the London Underground as the city's power is lost and residents shelter indoors.
In Washington, D.C., American Vice President Allan Trumbull (Morgan Freeman) investigates the incident with British authorities while trying to track down the President. He receives a call from Barkawi, still alive after all and operating in Sanaa. Seeking revenge for the drone strike that killed his daughter, and having poisoned Wilson to lure the G7 to London, Barkawi knows Asher is still alive, and promises that if Kamran captures him, he will broadcast Asher's execution online. Trumbull orders his staff to locate Barkawi's known operatives and find any connection to the attack, while British authorities stand down all first responders so any left in the open can be identified as terrorists.
After leaving a sign to be picked up by satellite, Banning leads Asher to an MI6 safe-house, where agent Jacquelin "Jax" Marshall (Charlotte Riley) briefs them. Marshall receives a voice message from Trumbull that they saw Banning's sign and an extraction team is en route. Security monitors display an approaching Delta Force team, but Banning realizes they have arrived too soon and are actually Barkawi’s mercenaries. He fights and kills all of them and drives away with Asher, but their car is struck before they can reach the US Embassy, and Asher is taken. Banning is rescued by the combined Delta/SAS extraction team, who suspect a mole in the British government.
Trumbull's staff identify a building owned by one of Barkawi's front companies, drawing massive power despite being unoccupied, and realize it is Kamran's headquarters. Banning joins the extraction team to infiltrate the building, arriving seconds before Kamran can decapitate Asher. Kamran escapes when his hacker Sultan Mansoor (Mehdi Dehbi) drops a grenade with his dying breath, forcing Banning to protect Asher from the blast. Banning and Asher escape just before the building is destroyed by the Delta Force/SAS squad, killing Kamran and the remaining terrorists. Marshall and British authorities restore London's security system and, discovering that MI5 Intelligence Chief John Lancaster (Patrick Kennedy) was Barkawi's mole, Marshall kills him when he resists arrest. Trumbull tells Barkawi that his plan failed, moments before US federal authorities attack the building armed with another drone strike, killing Barkawi and the remaining members of his terrorist group.
Two weeks later, Banning is home spending time with Leah and their newborn child Lynne, named after Jacobs. As Banning contemplates sending a letter of resignation, he watches Trumbull speak on television regarding the recent events, with a message that the U.S. will prevail. Inspired, Banning deletes the letter.


== Cast ==
Gerard Butler as Secret Service Agent Mike Banning
Aaron Eckhart as President Benjamin Asher
Morgan Freeman as Vice President Allan Trumbull
Alon Moni Aboutboul as Aamir Barkawi, a Pakistani international arms trafficker and terrorist mastermind who is No. 6 on the FBI's 10 Most Wanted list.
Angela Bassett as Secret Service Director Lynne Jacobs
Robert Forster as US Army General Edward Clegg, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Jackie Earle Haley as White House Deputy Chief of Staff DC Mason
Melissa Leo as Secretary of Defense Ruth McMillan
Radha Mitchell as Leah Banning, Mike's wife.
Sean O'Bryan as NSA Deputy Director Ray Monroe
Charlotte Riley as MI6 Agent Jacquelin "Jax" Marshall
Waleed Zuaiter as Kamran Barkawi, Aamir's son and sub-commander
Colin Salmon as Commissioner Sir Kevin Hazard, head of the Metropolitan Police
Bryan Larkin as SAS Captain Will Davies
Patrick Kennedy as MI5 Counter-Intelligence Chief John Lancaster
Mehdi Dehbi as Sultan Mansoor, the terrorist hacker
Adel Bencherif as Raza Mansoor, Sultan's brother and a terrorist
Michael Wildman as Secret Service Agent Voight
Andrew Pleavin as Secret Service Agent Bronson
Deborah Grant as Doris, Leah's mother
Clarkson Guy Williams as British Prime Minister Leighton Clarkson
Penny Downie as Home Secretary Rose Kenter
Philip Delancy as French President Jacques Mainard
Alex Giannini as Italian Prime Minister Antonio Gusto. It was Giannini's last movie role before his death in October 2, 2015.
Elsa Mollien as Mrs Viviana Gusto
Nancy Baldwin as German Chancellor Agnes Bruckner
Nigel Whitmey as Canadian Prime Minister Robert Bowman
Julia Montgomery Brown as Mrs Bowman
Tsuwayuki Saotome as Japanese Prime Minister Tsutomu Nakushima
Lawrence O'Donnell as himself (uncredited)


== Production ==


=== Casting ===
Butler, Eckhart, Freeman, Bassett, Leo, Forster and Mitchell reprised their roles from Olympus Has Fallen. Production had been scheduled to begin in May 2015 in London, with Creighton Rothenberger and Katrin Benedikt returning to write the script. Director Antoine Fuqua, however, did not return, due to his commitments with The Equalizer. On May 1, 2014, it was announced Focus Features had acquired distribution rights to the sequel, and would release the film on October 2, 2015. On August 18, 2014, it was announced that Charlie Countryman director Fredrik Bond would take over direction from Fuqua, but Bond left the film on September 18, six weeks before the shooting was to begin. On September 28, director Babak Najafi signed on to direct the film. On October 10, Jackie Earle Haley joined the film to play Deputy Chief Mason. On November 12, Mehdi Dehbi joined the film to play Sultan Mansoor, the youngest of three brothers whose life has been forever changed after a drone strike.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography began on October 24, 2014, in London. Four weeks of shooting were to take place, involving actors Freeman, Eckhart, Bassett and Melissa Leo, before a break for Christmas. Butler and Angela Bassett were seen filming in Somerset House. Butler stated in an interview that the movie was also filmed in India and was to continue in Bulgaria. Then President of Bulgaria, Rosen Plevneliev, visited the set of London Has Fallen during filming at Boyana Cinema Center in Bulgaria. Filming lasted through April 2015.


=== Score ===
The music was composed and conducted by Trevor Morris, who provided the score for the first film. The record was released on March 4, 2016, by Back Lot Music. The score was recorded at Abbey Road Studios with The Chamber Orchestra of London.
All music composed by Trevor Morris.


== Release ==
On May 20, 2015, Focus Features relaunched their Gramercy Pictures label for action, horror, and science fiction releases, with London Has Fallen being one of Gramercy's first titles. The film was planned for an October 2, 2015, release, however, on June 12, 2015, it was announced that the film had been moved back to January 22, 2016, to avoid competition with The Martian, which swapped its original November 25 release date with Victor Frankenstein. On July 1, 2015, the film's teaser trailer was released. The timing of the release was criticized as "insensitive" by the Chair of the Tavistock Square Memorial Trust, Philip Nelson, as it coincided with the week of the 10th anniversary of the 7 July 2005 London bombings, in which 52 people were killed, and with the 2015 Sousse attacks, in which 30 British nationals were killed. On September 16, 2015, the film's release was moved back again to March 4, 2016, because the studios needed more time to finish the film's visual effects. The U.S. trailer was released on November 5, 2015. A new theatrical poster of the film was released on January 21, 2016.


== Home media ==
London Has Fallen was released on Blu-ray and DVD on June 14, 2016.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
London Has Fallen grossed $62.7 million in North America and $143.2 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $205.9 million, against a budget of $60 million. The film outgrossed its predecessor's total of $170 million.
In the United States and Canada, pre-release tracking suggested the film would gross $20–23 million from 3,490 theaters in its opening weekend, trailing fellow newcomer Zootopia ($60–70 million projection) but besting Whiskey Tango Foxtrot ($10–12 million projection). The film made $850,000 from its Thursday night previews and $7.6 million on its first day. It went on to gross $21.6 million in its opening weekend, finishing second at the box office behind Zootopia ($75 million).


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 28% based on 197 reviews, with an average rating of 4.10/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "London Has Fallen traps a talented cast – and all who dare to see it – in a mid-1990s basic-cable nightmare of a film loaded with xenophobia, and threadbare action-thriller clichés." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 28 out of 100, based on reviews from 35 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, the same score as the first film.Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club wrote: "A murky, brain-dead stab-a-thon packed with so many inane chases, laughable special effects, and mismatched stock footage shots that it begs to be made into a drinking game, London Has Fallen is one of those rare films that is good at absolutely nothing." The A.V. Club later picked it as their worst film of the year.


=== Controversy ===
Variety described London Has Fallen as "effortlessly racist" invoking "familiar Islamophobia", a "terrorsploitation" fantasy designed to spread fear after the November 2015 Paris attacks, and "ugly, reactionary fear-mongering."
Meanwhile, The Hollywood Reporter styled it as "major world capitals destruction porn sub-genre" that feeds a "paranoia".The film has been called "extremely insensitive" by families of the victims of the 7/7 bombings after an early trailer was released ahead of the 10th anniversary of the attacks.


== Sequel ==

On October 26, 2016, it was announced that a sequel titled Angel Has Fallen is in development, with Gerard Butler reprising his role, as well as once again acting as a producer on the film.On July 25, 2017, Ric Roman Waugh was announced as director for Angel Has Fallen. On January 10, 2018, Holt McCallany joined the cast as Wade Jennings, an ex-military turned head of a technology company, but was replaced later by Danny Huston. On January 18, 2018, Jada Pinkett Smith and Tim Blake Nelson were confirmed to appear in Angel Has Fallen. On February 13, 2018, Piper Perabo joined the cast. Filming started on February 7, 2018 in Virginia Water Lake.The film was released on August 23, 2019.


== See also ==
List of fictional Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
London Has Fallen at IMDb
London Has Fallen at Box Office Mojo
London Has Fallen at Rotten Tomatoes
London Has Fallen at Metacritic
London Has Fallen at AllMovie
London Has Fallen at the TCM Movie Database