Love Don't Cost a Thing (stylized as Love Don't Co$t a Thing) is a 2003 American teen comedy film written and directed by Troy Beyer and starring Nick Cannon and Christina Milian. It also stars Steve Harvey, Kenan Thompson and Kal Penn. The film is a remake of the 1987 film Can't Buy Me Love and takes its title from the Jennifer Lopez song of the same name.


== Plot ==
Alvin Johnson (Nick Cannon) is an extremely intelligent nerd skilled in designing car engines. He has also taken up a job as a pool cleaner, to raise money to buy a camshaft and to build an engine for a scholarship project that will ensure him a full ride to the school of his choice. Alvin has always dreamed of hanging out with the popular kids, especially Paris Morgan (Christina Milian), a beautiful, popular black cheerleader dating NBA star Dru Hilton (Elimu Nelson). When Paris crashes her mother's expensive SUV during an argument with Dru, Alvin agrees to repair the car using the money he had earned for his project, jeopardizing his scholarship opportunity, in which Paris pays him back by giving him a $1,500 makeover.
After a few missteps, Alvin begins to ingratiate himself with the popular crowd. He and Paris grow closer as she shares with him her secret love of music and he shares with her that he knows how to build car engines. Paris begins to develop feelings for Alvin and at the end of their two-week dating period, she tries to hint that she would like to kiss him. However, Alvin misinterprets her and goes along with their original plan of a public break up at school.
Even after the break up, Alvin continues to grow in popularity, alienating his former nerdy friends and dating Paris's friends. Paris is unhappy to realize how shallow and vapid her friends are, and by extension, Alvin. Tired of him constantly ditching them in favor of the popular kids, Alvin's friends confront him on the matter, during which Alvin's sister Aretha overhears. She comes to the conclusion that Alvin paid Paris to date her, She tells their parents who attempt to talk to Alvin, but he blows them off.
At the end of the year on Senior Ditch Day, Paris asks Alvin to hang out as real friends, but a newly egotistical Alvin insults her. They argue and storm off from each other. Dru is also at the party to reconcile with Paris and is unimpressed that she has been dating Alvin. In an attempt to win Dru back, Paris admits her deal with Alvin to the school, returning Alvin back to mediocrity. Now back to being unpopular, Alvin finally realizes he does not have the crankshaft for his project.
Alvin's father Clarence (Steve Harvey) pays for the crankshaft, telling Alvin that they will work out a plan later to pay him back while also explaining to Alvin that he'd supported his sudden transformation because he wanted Alvin to have the same experiences he did while he was in high school, seeing as he was one of the most popular guys at his school. He also admits that he didn't have Alvin's brains or potential but he's always been proud of his son. With this confidence restored, Alvin builds an engine with the part his dad bought. Alvin's friends push the broken car they had been working on into the garage. They congratulate him on a job well done on completing the engine but are still angry with him for blowing them off. Alvin sees that their car needs a new engine so he installs the one he just built to restore their car, telling them to let him have it sometime within that next week so he can present it to the scholarship committee. Alvin's friends forgive him.
Together, they all attend a school basketball game where Alvin stands up for his nerd friends against the basketball players. Alvin finally redeems himself in front of everyone and his friends become friendly with the popular crowd. Alvin leaves the gymnasium, and as Paris follows him out, she is stopped by Dru. Paris blows him off and chases after Alvin. They finally kiss and agree to date.
In a deleted scene, 6 months have passed by and it is shown that Alvin & Paris are attending an open mic night. It is revealed that Alvin got into Princeton while Paris decided to pursue her dreams of being an R&B singer.


== Cast ==
Nick Cannon as Alvin Johnson
Christina Milian as Paris Morgan
Steve Harvey as Clarence Johnson
Al Thompson as Ted
Ashley Monique Clark as Aretha Johnson
Elimu Nelson as Dru Hilton
Russell W. Howard as Anthony
Kenan Thompson as Walter
Kal Penn as Kenneth Warman
Melissa Schuman as Zoe Parks
Nichole Robinson as Yvonne Freeman
Reagan Gomez-Preston as Olivia
Sam Sarpong as Kadeem
Vanessa Bell Calloway as Vivian Johnson
Nicole Scherzinger as Champagne Girl
Stuart Scott as Himself
Peter Siragusa as Ben
Imani Parks as Mia
Shani Pride as Jasmine
Gay Thomas Wilson as Judy Morgan
Dante Basco as Spoken Word Artist
J.B. Guhman Jr. as JB
Ian Chidlaw as Eddie


== Production ==
The school scenes were filmed at Long Beach Polytechnic High School in Long Beach, California.


== Soundtrack ==
A soundtrack containing hip hop music was released on December 9, 2003 by Hollywood Records. It peaked at 22 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums and 14 on the Top Soundtracks. Allmusic rated this soundtrack three stars out of five.
"Shorty (Put It on the Floor)"- 4:09 (Busta Rhymes, Chingy, Fat Joe and Nick Cannon)
"Luv Me Baby"- 4:27 (Murphy Lee featuring Jazze Pha and Sleepy Brown)
"Ignition (Remix)- 3:08 (R. Kelly)
"Are You Ready"- 4:13 (Mr. Cheeks)
"Got What It Takes"- 3:00 (Jeannie Ortega)
"Pass the Courvoisier, Part II"- 4:11 (Busta Rhymes featuring P. Diddy and Pharrell Williams)
"Exgirlfriend"- 4:02 (Nivea)
"How Far Will You Go"- 3:45 (Ginuwine)
"Comes to Light (Everything)"- 4:48 (Jill Scott)
"Always"- 4:21 (Melissa Schuman)
"Baby Girl"- 4:06 (Joe Budden)
"I Wanna Kiss You"- 4:30 (Nicole Wray)
"We Rise"- 4:04 (Rama Duke)
"Hate 2 Luv U"- 3:29 (3LW)
"She Is"- 3:33 (Hous'ton)
"Spit da Flow"- 3:32 (Cash Take & B. Griffin)


== Box office ==
The film opened at #4 at the U.S. Box office raking in $6,315,311 USD in its first opening weekend behind Stuck on You, The Last Samurai, and Something's Gotta Give.


=== Critical response ===

The film has received mostly negative reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes it has an approval rating of 13% based on reviews from 72 critics. The site's consensus: "A stale, unnecessary remake of Can't Buy Me Love." On Metacritic it has a score of 37% based on reviews from 23 critics.Roger Ebert, film critic of the Chicago Sun-Times, gave the film a positive three-star rating after giving the original, Can't Buy Me Love, only half a star. Ebert describes the remake as a wiser and less cynical than the original and suggests that it might have some insight into the insecurities of high school.


=== Awards and nominations ===
 

2004 BET Comedy AwardsOutstanding Directing for a Box Office Movie — Troy Beyer (nominated)2004 Teen Choice AwardsChoice Breakout Movie Star, Female — Christina Milian (nominated)
Choice Movie, Date Movie (nominated)
Choice Movie Chemistry — Christina Milian, Nick Cannon (nominated)
Choice Movie Liar — Nick Cannon (nominated)
Choice Movie Liplock — Christina Milian, Nick Cannon (nominated)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Love Don't Co$t a Thing at IMDb
Love Don't Co$t a Thing at Box Office Mojo
Love Don't Co$t a Thing at AllMovie