Meet the Browns is a 2008 American romantic comedy-drama film released by Lionsgate on March 21, 2008. The film was based on the play of the same name by Tyler Perry.


== Plot ==
In Chicago, Brenda Brown-Davis, the struggling single mother of Mike Jr., Lena, and Tosha, receives news that the father she has never met has died and his funeral will be in Georgia. The same day, the plant where she works with friend Cheryl closes, adding to her existing financial difficulties; then Miss Mildred, who supervises Lena in her home daycare, says she will not work for Brenda anymore, upset that Brenda has not been paying her.
Harry, a basketball scout, notices Mike Jr. when he plays well at a game and comes to their house to talk about the boy's future. Harry asks Brenda out but she says has no interest in hearing about her son going professional and walks away. She begs Miss Mildred to watch Tosha briefly and goes to see her ex with Cheryl for financial help to pay the woman back.  Mike Sr., who has never given Brenda any assistance, says no.
Brenda takes her children to Georgia to attend her father's funeral, and meets half-siblings who did not know she existed. She is surprised to run into Harry, who lives in the same town and is friendly with her father's family. At dinner Brenda learns that the eldest son of "Pop" Brown, LB, was the only one who knew about her. On his deathbed, Pop confessed to LB that he had been a pimp in Chicago; Brenda's mother, LB's mother, and many of Pop's friends, the children had all known, were his working girls. The family welcomes Brenda, offering support and encouragement. After the funeral, they learn that Pop Brown left a house to Brenda in his will. Brenda decides not to move into the house, despite Harry’s suggestion that she should stay.
Once Brenda is back in Chicago, Mike Sr. offers money in exchange for a one-night stand. After Brenda rejects him, Mike Jr. overhears Mike Sr. insulting her and storms out. In an attempt to make money to help, Mike Jr. turns to Calvin, a friend who deals drugs. Harry sees them together and suspects something is wrong.  He counsels Mike Jr. and goes home with him, to explain the situation to Brenda, who threatens to kick Mike Jr. out if he starts dealing drugs. Mike Jr. realizes the risks involved in drug dealing would let his family down and promises that he will not do it. When Harry and Brenda leave for a date, Mike Jr. tells Calvin that he has changed his mind and returns the drugs. A group of rival drug dealers arrive and attack Calvin for selling on their turf. Michael is shot and wounded when he runs away at Calvin's urging. This leads to a further breakdown in Brenda's relationship with Mike Sr.
After Mike Jr. recovers, Harry asks the Browns for help to get Pop Brown's old house for Brenda and her kids; they renovate the house and surprise her. Brenda overhears her half-sister Vera talking to LB's wife Sarah, suggesting that Harry is only dating Brenda to get his “perks” from helping Mike Jr. Brenda overhears the conversation confronts Harry; he asserts that he truly means well, but she breaks up with him.
A basketball league representative visits Brenda and offers Mike Jr. a million-dollar contract; Brenda learns that Harry referred them, and that Harry didn’t ask for any money. On the day Mike Jr. signs his contract, Mike Sr. arrives to be photographed with his ex and son, but Mike Jr. announces to the press that he does not know his father, and that his mother had raised him without support. After they leave, Mike Jr. tells his mother that Harry is a good man and more of a father figure than his actual father had been. Brenda goes to see Harry and they reconcile, ultimately leading to marriage.


== Cast ==
Angela Bassett as Brenda Brown
Rick Fox as Harry Belton
Lance Gross as Michael Rhodes Jr.
David Mann as Mr. Brown
Sofía Vergara as Cheryl Barranquilla
Margaret Avery as Sarah Brown
Frankie Faison as Larry "L.B." Brown
Tamela Mann as Cora Simmons
Phillip Van Lear as Michael Rhodes Sr.
Kristopher Lofton as Calvin
Mariana Tolbert as Lena Rhodes
Chloe Bailey as Tosha Brown
Jenifer Lewis as Vera Brown
Brandon Richardson as Officer Thompson
Irma P. Hall as Miss Mildred
Lamman Rucker as Will Brown
LaVan Davis as Henry
Tyler Perry as Mabel "Madea" Simmons, and Uncle Joe Simmons (cameo)


== Production ==
Meet the Browns completed filming on October 26, 2007 after beginning on July 12 the same year.


== Stageplay ==

The film is based on the play of the same name. The film altered almost all the plot details found in the play.


== Television series ==

Meet the Browns aired on TBS starring David Mann and Tamela Mann. The show's plot is different from the play and movie. Mr. Brown has opened up a senior citizens' home with the help of Cora, his nephew Will and his wife Sasha. Storylines involve the various zany residents of the home. The series, however, is a spin-off of the film, the stageplay and three episodes of Tyler Perry's House of Payne where Mann guest-starred as Mr. Brown, who learns that his deceased father states in his will that he wants him to open a senior citizens' home. Brown enlists the help of the Paynes, Cora, and Will. The other characters from the play and film are neither mentioned nor seen. However, Brown's sister Vera made a guest appearance in the third season of the series.


== Critical reception ==
The film received mixed reviews from critics. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a 33% approval rating based on 58 reviews, with an average rating of 4.85/10. The site's critics consensus reads: "Angela Bassett's considerable charms can't compensate for Meet the Browns' incessant melodrama and scattered narrative threads." Metacritic reported the film had an average score of 45 out of 100, based on 14 reviews.


== Box office ==
In its opening weekend, the film grossed an estimated $20 million in 2,006 theaters in the United States and Canada, ranking #2 at the box office behind Horton Hears a Who!. Although the film ranked second at the box office, it ranked first in average gross per theater, grossing $9,977 per theater compared to Horton's $6,336 per theater. When the film ended its run at the box office, it had grossed $41,975,388 over its $20 million budget, making the film a success.


== Soundtrack ==
The soundtrack was released by Atlantic Records on March 18, 2008.


=== Track list ===

People Everyday (Metamorphosis Mix) – Musiq Soulchild feat. Estelle
Face To Face – Coko & Case
Sweeter – Gerald Levert
Dig This – Brandy
I'll Take You There – Kelly Price
Love Again – Kelly Rowland
This Gift – Deborah Cox
Angel – Chaka Khan
Alright – Ledisi
Unify – Wynter Gordon
My Love – Jill Scott
Hallelujah – Tamela Mann


== Blu-ray / DVD release ==
Tyler Perry's Meet the Browns was sold in 1-disc and 2-disc DVD and Blu-ray on July 1, 2008. DVD sales have so far gathered $17,810,803 in revenue.


== References ==


== External links ==
Tyler Perry's Meet The Browns
Meet the Browns at IMDb
Meet the Browns at Rotten Tomatoes
Meet the Browns at Metacritic
Meet the Browns at Box Office Mojo
Meet the Browns at AllMovie