Notorious is a 2009 American biographical drama film about American rapper Christopher Wallace / The Notorious B.I.G., following his life and murder. Directed by George Tillman Jr. and written by Reggie Rock Bythewood and Cheo Hodari Coker, the film stars Jamal Woolard as Wallace, alongside Angela Bassett, Derek Luke, and Anthony Mackie. It received mixed reviews from critics and grossed $44.4 million on a $20 million budget.


== Plot ==
The film opens at a party in Los Angeles on March 9, 1997. Just as The Notorious B.I.G. is about to be shot inside his SUV while stopped at a red light in the corner of Wilshire Boulevard and Fairfax Avenue when an assailant in a Chevrolet Impala pulls up next to his SUV and opens fire, the film flashes back to Biggie's childhood in 1980s Brooklyn, New York, where he lived during his childhood years as a hard-working school student before he begins dealing drugs. Christopher (The Notorious B.I.G.'s real name), now older, sells drugs at the height of the crack epidemic, hustling with his friends "D-Roc" and Lil' Cease.
When his girlfriend, Jan Jackson, tells him that she is pregnant, he takes drug dealing more seriously so he can earn more money to support his growing family. Christopher eventually participates in a rap battle, where he wins, but his mother, Voletta Wallace, kicks him out of the house after finding drugs underneath his bed and also because of the fact letters were sent home about him not attending school.
Chris gets caught with guns and drugs, and he serves nine months in jail before being bailed out. Christopher meets Kim Jones, but Kim refuses to pursue a relationship with him due to her abusive past. After reconciling with his mother and visiting his newborn daughter, T'yanna, he records a demo under the name "Biggie Smalls", which catches the attention of Puff, an ambitious record producer working for Uptown. Puffy promises him a record deal, but Puffy later tells Biggie that he was fired by Uptown, to their mutually shared disappointment. Soon afterwards, he and D-Roc are again arrested for possessing a gun, but D-Roc takes the blame to allow Biggie to pursue his music career.
Biggie becomes depressed when he finds out his mother has been diagnosed with breast cancer, but is cheered up when Puffy signs him to his newly established record label, Bad Boy with a $60,000 advance and he records his debut album, Ready to Die. At a Bad Boy photoshoot, Biggie meets R&B singer Faith Evans. The pair begin a relationship and get married on August 9, 1994, after only knowing each other for eight days; however, Faith catches him cheating, putting an end to the relationship. The two later reconcile, but the tensions between Biggie, Faith, Jan, and Kim continue to grow.
At a party celebrating the release of Ready to Die, Tupac Shakur attends and Biggie warns him about the people he associates with, telling him to watch the company he keeps while he's in New York. When 2Pac is robbed and shot five times at Quad Studios, he blames Bad Boy. At The Source Awards in 1995, Suge Knight makes a speech dissing Bad Boy Records.
After altercations between the two rappers, the disagreement escalates into the media, who capitalize on the tension and stoke the flames of an "East Coast–West Coast rivalry", and attacks are made on both sides. At the 1996 Soul Train Awards in Los Angeles, Biggie receives a death threat from an unknown caller; it is one of several that he has received throughout the day. At the afterparty, 2Pac and Suge Knight verbally assault Biggie, but they leave when Biggie's security detail threatens them.
A song called "Who Shot Ya?" is released by Biggie, which is interpreted as a diss track by 2Pac. Biggie and Puffy claim that "Who Shot Ya?" was recorded before 2Pac was shot, but 2Pac responds with "Hit 'Em Up" where he disses Biggie, Puffy, Junior Mafia and the rest of the Bad Boy entourage. 2Pac also claims he had sex with Faith. After seeing a magazine photo of 2Pac and Faith together, Biggie accuses Faith of infidelity, but she insists nothing happened between her and 2Pac.
Biggie and Faith attempt to reconcile after she tells him that she is pregnant with his son, CJ Wallace, on October 29, 1996. The rivalry between the East and West Coast continues to escalate. At a concert in Sacramento, California, Biggie gets booed. After this, Biggie performs "Who Shot Ya?". The rivalry between Biggie and 2Pac continues until 2Pac is killed in Las Vegas, Nevada. Voletta tells Biggie that 2Pac was probably killed as a result of their feud, which shakes him up. Biggie attempts to ease the tensions in his life by visiting Jan and T'Yanna more often.
Biggie and D-Roc renew their friendship after D-Roc is released from prison, and Biggie confides to him that he wants out of the rap game. However, Biggie decides to go to Los Angeles to promote his upcoming album, Life After Death, bringing D-Roc and Lil' Cease with him, along with Puff Daddy and Faith. While out in L.A., Biggie receives more death threats. After calling Lil' Kim to apologize and arrange a meeting with her, he leaves the party. The film returns to the opening scene, where Biggie is killed by an unknown assailant.
His funeral is held a few days later, where friends and colleagues mourn, along with thousands of fans, who line the streets to pay their respects. In the epilogue, Voletta self-reflects on Biggie's life, stating that while she is hurt that he was taken before his time - she finds peace in the fact that he accomplished his dream and left a lasting impact. A member of the crowd turns on a ghetto blaster which plays Biggie's song "Hypnotize", and the crowd dances as Biggie's casket is driven down the city's streets.


== Cast ==