Exists is a 2014 American found footage monster horror film, directed by Eduardo Sánchez. The film had its world premiere on March 7, 2014 at South by Southwest and stars Chris Osborn and Samuel Davis. The story revolves around a group of friends hunted by something in the woods of East Texas. Following the darker psychological tone of Sánchez's previous film, Lovely Molly, the film returns to the creature-feature horror of Altered, also written by Jamie Nash.


== Plot ==
Brothers Brian and Matt invite a group of friends - Matt's girlfriend Dora and their friends Todd and Elizabeth - on a camping trip to their Uncle Bob's cabin in East Texas. After a stop to buy some fireworks, Matt hits something with the car and stops to investigate. The group hears loud animal cries in the distance but dismisses them. Finding the road blocked by a fallen tree, the group continues on foot and reaches the cabin, only to discover that it is worn down and dilapidated. After finding a wild pig in one of the bedrooms, the group decides to spend the night in the car, where Brian and Matt again hear the loud screaming noises.
The next morning, Brian finds the front bumper of the car damaged; there is also some blood on the fender and a tuft of hair in the grille. Brian catches sight of a large, dark bipedal figure running along a nearby ridge, but the others brush this off. Determined to get the creature on film, he sets up several GoPro cameras at various points around the cabin. That night, aggressive screams are heard coming from the woods, frightening the group. One of the exterior cameras reveals a large figure approaching the cabin and climbing onto the porch, causing more alarm by banging on the walls and doors. When silence falls, Brian goes to a window to take a look outside. He switches on the camera's night vision and sees a large hairy creature looking back at him before it roars and disappears from view.
The following morning, the group decides to leave, but finds their car completely destroyed. Matt and Brian reveal that they didn't tell their Uncle Bob they were using his cabin and that they stole the keys from him, so nobody knows where the group is. Matt bikes to an area of the woods that has cell reception so that he can call for help, but just as he gets through to Bob, he is attacked by the creature and the camera cuts to black. Back at the cabin, the others move the furniture to block the windows and doors. They uncover a trap door to the cabin's cellar, where Todd finds a hunting rifle and ammunition. At nightfall, the creature attacks the cabin and injures Elizabeth before Todd shoots and wounds it, causing it to flee.
In the morning, the campers find Elizabeth has died of her injuries. The doors and windows of the cabin have been smashed open, rendering it useless for shelter. The remaining three members of the group decide to hike back to civilization. That night, they hear Matt screaming from a tunnel which they guess to be the creature's den. Brian rescues Matt, shooting the creature. As dawn breaks, the group takes shelter in an abandoned trailer. Brian receives a call from Bob, who is now at the cabin. Todd sets off the fireworks hoping to alert Bob to their location, only to have the creature attack and kill him. The creature then pushes the trailer over the edge of a hill with Brian, Matt, and Dora still inside. When Brian regains consciousness, he finds Matt dead and Dora fatally injured, dying seconds later. Brian flees but the creature pursues him and drags him off.
Brian is then seen waking in a panic, lying next to the bodies of Todd, Matt, Dora, and Elizabeth. Nearby he sees a small figure lying in a shallow grave, which proves to be the corpse of a young bigfoot. Brian realizes that the child must have been what they hit on their way to the cabin, and begins apologizing hysterically, but the creature knocks him into the grave.
Suddenly a shot is heard, and the creature flees as Bob calls out. He and Brian flee the scene. As they near Bob's truck, the bigfoot appears and tackles Bob to the ground, seemingly killing him. Brian picks up his uncle's gun and runs as the creature gives chase. He turns and points at the creature, begging it to stop. The creature stops a few feet away from him, breathing heavily as Brian continues to apologize for killing its young. Brian lays down the gun, turning around and sitting down with his back to the creature, saying to the camera that this is his final video while he waits for the creature to finish him off. The creature turns and disappears into the woods, leaving Brian alone as it begins to rain and he lays the camera down facing the truck.


== Cast ==
Dora Madison Burge as Dora
Chris Osborn as Brian
Roger Edwards as Todd
Denise Williamson as Elizabeth
Samuel Davis as Matt
Brian Steele as Sasquatch
Jeff Schwan as Uncle Bob (as J.P. Schwan)
George P. Gakoumis Jr. as Firework Salesman (as George Gakoumis)
Stefanie Sanchez as 911  Operator


== Release ==
Exists premiered on 7 March 2014 as part of the South by Southwest Film Festival and was released on February 3, 2015. Entertainment One set the United Kingdom release, on DVD and Blu-ray for the April 6, 2015.


== Reception ==
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, Exists holds an approval rating of 30%, based on 24 reviews, and an average rating of 4.80/10. On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 22 out of 100, based on 22 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".In a particularly scathing review, Keith Uhlich from The A.V. Club wrote, "It feels strange to be so dismissive about someone who once commanded wide attention (however much as a fluke) with an indie blockbuster that effectively birthed a lucrative mainstream genre. But Sánchez, sadly, is now a pretender to his own throne." Ed Gonzalez of Slant Magazine rated the film 1.5 out of 4 stars, panning the film's uninteresting characters, 'under-realized metaphorical ambitions', and thin story. Geoff Berkshire from Variety criticized the film's thin characters, and script, writing, "Eschewing the painfully slow-burning suspense and pseudo-realism that helped make Blair Witch a sleeper smash and genre touchstone, Sanchez’s thoroughly conventional approach here does little to elevate a dismally generic script". Robert Abele of the Los Angeles Times was highly critical of the film, calling it "aggressively unimaginative". Frank Scheck from The Hollywood Reporter similarly criticized the film's clichéd script, and thin characters, calling it "a compendium of horror movie clichés whose visual style is roughly akin to trying to watch a movie while riding in a rollercoaster."The film was not without its supporters.
Richard Wittaker of Fearnet praised Exists for its editing and score, as they felt that it would help make the movie appeal to people who would not normally like found footage films. The Austin Chronicle gave a predominantly positive review and commented that while the film held several similarities to Sánchez's The Blair Witch Project, "he evades all those bear traps, returning tension and pathos to the monster movie."


== References ==


== External links ==
Exists at IMDb
Exists at Rotten Tomatoes
Exists at Metacritic
Exists at AllMovie