Out Cold is a 2001 American comedy film about a group of snowboarders in Alaska. It is the first feature film by the music video directing team The Malloys, after co-directing the surfing documentary Thicker than Water (2000) with musician Jack Johnson. The film presents itself as a parody of 1990s "ski school" movies and makes a number of references to the film Casablanca. A number of elements of the latter, including plot and famous lines, were incorporated into Out Cold.


== Plot ==
Rick Rambis, best friend Luke, and other friends Anthony, "Pig Pen", Jenny, Lance and Stumpy, all live and work at a ski resort on Bull Mountain in Alaska. The mountain and resort were founded by Herbert "Papa" Muntz who loved to drink and ski at the same time until he died doing so. His son, Ted, took over the mountain and plans to sell it to wealthy Colorado ski resort tycoon, John Majors. In addition to being friends, Rick has romantic designs on Jenny, but is held back as he is still getting over his ex, Anna, who mysteriously disappeared after 3 weeks of summer love in Mexico.
After arriving at the mountain, John Majors plans to change the mountain name and turn the ski village into a first class resort but seeks Rick's help in getting his rowdy friends in line so as not to scare off his investors. John brings with him to the mountain his daughters, Inga, a Swiss ski bunny, and Anna, Rick's summer fling. After Anna's arrival, Rick then gets drunk and misses his date with Jenny. Later, Anna explains she left Rick in Mexico because she was already engaged and that Rick was the other man. Majors begins to make major changes to the town and mountain, such as changing the dive bar to an upscale club and removing the statue of Papa Muntz from the center of the town. Majors offers Rick a contract to be his new manager and Rick agrees on the condition that his friends all get to stay, but Majors secretly has Ted fire them behind his back. Rick finds out about the firing of his friends and quits his job and races to stop his friends from leaving.
Rick gives an inspirational speech about how the mountain is their home and not letting Majors ruin the memory of Papa Muntz, they all grab their snowboards and head for the mountain. The group of friends and Inga then cause bedlam at the festivities and Major is outraged at Rick's betrayal. Rick frees Anna from her father and takes her to an airstrip where Barry, her fiancé, waits in his plane. He tells Anna what they had in Mexico was special but that he realized she belongs with Barry and Rick watches Anna fly away. The friends defeat Majors and Ted decides he is no longer selling the mountain. Rick asks Jenny out again after revealing he no longer thinks of Anna.


== Cast ==
Jason London as Rick Rambis
A. J. Cook as Jenny
Lee Majors as John Majors
Willie Garson as Ted Muntz
Zach Galifianakis as Luke
David Koechner as Stumpy
Flex Alexander as Anthony
David Denman as Lance
Caroline Dhavernas as Anna
Derek Hamilton as Pig Pen
Thomas Lennon as Eric Montclare
Victoria Silvstedt as Inga
Todd Richards as Barry
Lewis Arquette as Herbert 'Papa' Muntz
Rio Tahara as Tetsuo
Brett Kelly as Toby
Lee R. Mayes as Whitey
Danny Hagge as Stewart
Adam Harrington as Team Snownook Leader
Rob "Sluggo" Boyce as Snownook Guy
Ted Stryker as Tourist Dude in Line-Up
Steve Kahan as Powder Room Bartender
Richard Donner as Snooty Bartender (uncredited)


== Soundtrack ==
The Out Cold soundtrack is a 12-track compilation of songs from the film. It is available on the RCA record label.  The Weezer song "Island in the Sun" plays an important part in the film, but is left off of the soundtrack.


== Reception ==
Out Cold has an 8% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, a review aggregator, based on 49 reviews; the average rating is 2.9/10.  The site's consensus reads: "A party movie that substitutes surfs for snow, Out Cold will leave viewers just that with its gross-out humor and sophomoric plot."  Metacritic rated it 22/100 based on 15 reviews.


== References ==


== External links ==
Out Cold at IMDb
Out Cold at AllMovie
Out Cold at Rotten Tomatoes
Out Cold at Box Office Mojo