Premonition is a 2007 American supernatural thriller film directed by Mennan Yapo and starring Sandra Bullock in the lead role, Julian McMahon, and Amber Valletta. The film's plot depicts a homemaker named Linda who experiences the days surrounding her husband's death in a non-chronological order, and how she attempts to save him from his impending doom.


== Plot ==
Jim and Linda Hanson are married with two daughters, Megan and Bridgette, but their relationship is faltering. Jim is away on a business trip and Linda has just listened to a phone message from him when Sheriff Reilly knocks on the door and informs her that Jim died in a car accident the previous day. Linda's mother Joanne arrives to help the family, and Linda falls asleep on the living-room couch. 
The next morning she wakes up in bed and goes downstairs to find Jim drinking coffee and watching TV. While on the road, Linda is pulled over by Sheriff Reilly, who doesn't recognize her.
The next day, Jim is again dead and Bridgette has scars on her face. Linda awakens next to an empty bottle of lithium pills prescribed by Dr. Norman Roth. At Jim's burial, Linda notices a strange woman mourning at a distance, who flees when Linda approaches her. Linda finds Dr. Roth's phone number in the garbage, but his voice-mail message states that the office is only open on weekdays. Roth later subdues her with two assistants and Sheriff Reilly and commits her to a mental-health facility. Roth confides in Reilly that Linda told him Jim was dead the day before the accident, suggesting the likelihood that she murdered him and scarred Bridgette's face. 
Linda next awakens in her bed and finds Jim in the shower. After dropping the girls off at school she goes to see Dr. Roth, who doesn't recognize her, and tells him about the premonitions she's been having. He prescribes lithium. Linda visits Jim at his office and meets the stranger from the funeral, who introduces herself as Claire Francis. Linda gradually realizes that Jim was planning to have an affair with Claire during his business trip, and she contemplates letting him die. Back at the house, despite Linda's warning, Bridgette runs through a glass door and cuts her face and hands. Linda throws Dr. Roth's number into the garbage and suddenly realizes that her days are unfolding out of order. She records Tuesday as the current day, Saturday as the funeral day, and Wednesday as Jim's death. Before Jim goes to bed she tells him, "If tomorrow is Wednesday, please, please wake me up before you leave."
On Friday she visits the insurance agent, who tells her that Jim tripled his life-insurance benefits the morning of his accident. 
On the previous Sunday she visits Father Kennedy who tells her the story of a woman with similar experiences who was hanged for witchcraft. That night Linda pressures Jim to show her the same affection he once did. They argue, but Jim finds his feelings for her reawakening, and they make love.
Linda wakes up in her bed on Wednesday and reads a note from Jim saying that he has taken the kids to school. She searches for Jim, who calls the house and leaves the message from the beginning of the film. He then calls Claire and tells her that he won't go through with their planned affair. As Jim nears the site of the accident, Linda reaches him by cell phone and the two have a reconciliation. Linda tells Jim to turn the car around to avert the accident. This instead causes the accident, as Jim's car stalls in the middle of the road when performing the turn. 
The film's final scene is set a few months later. Bridgette's scars are less visible, and Linda is pregnant.


== Cast ==
Julian McMahon as James "Jim" Hanson
Sandra Bullock as Linda Hanson
Courtney Taylor Burness as Bridgette Hanson
Shyann McClure as Megan Hanson
Amber Valletta as Claire Francis
Nia Long as Annie
Kate Nelligan as Joanne
Marc Macaulay as Sheriff Reilly
Jude Ciccolella as Father Kennedy
Peter Stormare as Dr. Norman Roth
Seamus Davey-Fitzpatrick as Simon Hanson
Mark Famiglietti as Doug Caruthers
Marcus Lyle Brown as Bob
E.J. Stapleton as Model Home Salesman
Matt Moore as young priest
Irene Zeigler as Mrs. Quinn
Laurel Whitsett as school aide
Kristin Ketterer as receptionist
Jason Douglas as emergency room doctor
Lonnie Magargle as doctor's assistant
Floriana Tullio as nurse


== Production ==
Principal photography mostly took place in Minden and Shreveport, Louisiana. This film is also the first to be co-distributed by TriStar Pictures and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.


== Release ==
The film was first released in the U.S. on March 16, 2007. It was not released theatrically in Norway, but it was released direct-to-video on January 2, 2008 there.


=== Home media ===
The film was released on Blu-ray and DVD on July 17, 2007.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Premonition opened in 2,831 theaters and came in third place behind 300 and Wild Hogs, opening with $17,558,689 with a $6,202 average. The film stayed in theaters for 7 weeks and grossed $47,852,604 in the United States and $84,146, 832 worldwide.


=== Critical reception ===
The film received negative reviews from critics. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 8% of 163 critics gave the film a positive review, with a rating average of 3.86/10. The site's general consensus is that "Overdosing on flashbacks, and more portentous than profound, the overly obtuse Premonition weakly echoes such twisty classics as Memento, The Sixth Sense, and Groundhog Day." On Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from film critics, the film is considered to have "generally unfavorable reviews" with a rating score of 29 based on 30 critics. Critic James Berardinelli, on ReelViews, gave the movie 2-1/2-stars (out of five) stating, "There's some interesting material in the film about pre-destination and questions about whether it's possible to change fate."   Expressing similar thoughts of blasé opaque contributions of the main characters wife Linda Hanson (Sandra Bullock) and husband James Hanson (Julian McMahon). Despite the weak reviews, several critics, including Rex Reed, commended Sandra Bullock for her performance.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Premonition at IMDb
Premonition at AllMovie
Premonition at Rotten Tomatoes
Premonition at Metacritic
Premonition at Box Office Mojo
DVD Review: Premonition - Monsters and Critics