Pride is a 2007 American biographical film released by Lionsgate Entertainment on March 23, 2007. Loosely based upon the true story of Philadelphia swim coach James "Jim" Ellis, Pride stars Terrence Howard, Bernie Mac, and Kimberly Elise. The film was directed by Sunu Gonera.
The film centers on Jim Ellis (Terrence Howard) and grouchy but caring janitor Elston (Bernie Mac). The two have a short-lived rivalry before becoming good friends.


== Plot ==
It is 1974 and life is not easy for a black male to find employment, even college-educated Jim Ellis (Terrence Howard). While struggling to find anything better, Jim, a former competitive swimmer, is working on the decrepit Marcus Foster Recreation Center in a poor neighborhood  of Philadelphia. 
His job is to prepare the foreclosure of the Center, causing friction with Elston (Bernie Mac), the janitor whose job may disappear. 
The Center includes a dilapidated swimming pool, which Ellis rehabilitates. One day, Jim invites a group of black teens in for a swim. Andre (Kevin Phillips), Hakim (Nate Parker), Reggie (Evan Ross), Puddin’ Head (Brandon Fobbs), and Walt (Alphonso McAuley) prove to be fairly capable swimmers and with a few pointers, could become great swimmers. 
In parallel, Jim develops a romantic interest in Hakim's sister and guardian (Kimberly Elise) who wants him to attend school before pool. 
With some help from Elston, Jim decides to try to save the swimming pool by starting the city's first all African-American swim team, the "PDR team" for both Pride, Determination, Resilience and Philadelphia Department of Recreation. Once they are joined by Willie (Regine Nehy), a female swimmer more talented than any of the boys, the prospects of competing against much more experienced white teams begin to improve.
However, Black swimmers are not welcome everywhere and the team has to fight overtly racist opposition and treachery, which is what Jim already experienced when he was competing 10 years ago.
Throughout their struggles in and out of the swimming pool, Jim and Elston encourage and mentor the kids, helping them not only to become successful at swimming but also in their struggles against prejudice, crime, and poverty.


== Cast ==
Terrence Howard as Jim Ellis
Bernie Mac as Elston Johnson
Kimberly Elise as Sue Carter
Evan Ross as Reggie Jones
Tom Arnold as Richard Binkowski
Alphonso McAuley as Walt Taylor
Regine Nehy as Willie Thompson
Scott Eastwood as Jake
Nate Parker as Hakim Carter
Kevin Phillips as Andre Williamson
Gary Sturgis as Franklin
Brandon Fobbs as Puddin' Head


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Pride was met with mixed reviews from critics, with a 45% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 109 reviews, with an average score of 5.47/10. The website's critics consensus reads: "Pride features a typically stellar performance from Terrence Howard, but ultimately falls victim to its over usage of sports movie clichés." The New York Times critic Matt Zoller Seitz noted that the movie "illustrates the adaptability and limitations of the sports movie," but concluded that when the film's idealists glide through the water amidst the tunes of the time, "the heart still leaps."  Comedian Bill Burr spoofed and criticized the film as an example of the overabundance of films about white-on-black racism with continuously lower stakes.


=== Accolades ===


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Official website
Pride at IMDb
Pride at AllMovie