Proud Mary is a 2018 American  action thriller film directed by Babak Najafi, from a screenplay written by John S. Newman and Christian Swegal. The film stars Taraji P. Henson, Jahi Di'Allo Winston, Billy Brown, Danny Glover, Neal McDonough, Xander Berkeley, Margaret Avery, and follows an assassin who must look after a young teenaged boy after a hit job goes wrong.
Proud Mary was released on January 12, 2018, by Screen Gems, which was also the film's production company. Upon release, the film received negative reviews from critics and grossed $21 million.


== Plot ==
In Boston, assassin Mary Goodwin kills her target Marcus Miller in his apartment. Before leaving, she notices Marcus’ young son Danny, oblivious in his room. A year later, Danny – unaware Mary has been keeping an eye on him – is working for a drug dealer who calls himself Uncle. When a customer, Jerome, tries to short him, Danny pulls a gun and takes the full payment. He buys himself food and delivers the money to Uncle, but is beaten for stealing. Dazed, Danny rests on a bench, but a man steals his bag, forcing Danny to chase him and fire in the air. The thief drops the bag, but Danny faints and is found by Mary.
Danny awakens in Mary’s home, and she offers him food and first aid. Noticing the marks from Uncle’s abuse, Mary confronts the dealer, but is forced to kill Uncle and his men. Leaving Danny at her apartment, Mary attends a meeting with her associates Tom, Walter, and their employer, mob boss Benny Spencer. They meet with Luka, Uncle’s nephew and head of a rival mob, assuring him that they had nothing to do with Uncle’s death. Mary encourages Benny’s suspicion that Walter was responsible for eliminating Uncle and his crew, and Benny instructs her to kill Walter. Discovering Mary’s cache of guns, Danny opens up to Mary about his life, unaware she is his father’s killer.
Following Walter on his routine jog, Mary kills him. Luka sends his men to ambush Benny, killing several members of his crew. Determined to retaliate, Tom – Benny’s son and Mary’s ex-boyfriend – visits Mary’s apartment and questions Danny. Tom tortures one of Luka’s men, learning of an upcoming meeting of Luka and his crew, and Benny invites Mary to bring Danny to his wife Mina’s birthday dinner. Buying Danny new clothes, Mary tells him about her similar childhood, and coaches him on what to say to Benny, warning that he is not to be trusted. At the dinner, Mary tells Benny that she wants to leave her criminal life behind, and Tom confronts her, having deduced that Danny is Marcus’ son.
Mary tells Danny to start a new life elsewhere with her stash of money, should anything happen to her. Tom warns her that Benny will not let her leave his crew alive, and they storm Luka’s hideout; Mary is wounded, but they fail to find Luka. Refusing Tom’s help, Mary returns home, and tells a shaken Danny that Benny will never release her. Danny goes to Benny’s office – where he is spotted by Jerome, who works for Benny – and demands that he allow Mary to move on, holding him at gunpoint. Having learned Danny’s true identity from Tom, Benny tells him the truth about his father’s death and takes the gun, but Mary appears. Sending Danny away, she pleads with Benny to let her go, but he cruelly refuses, declaring that she must train Danny as an assassin. Mary kills him and escapes unseen.
Tom learns from Jerome that Danny was the last person seen with Benny. Mary finds Danny and shares her remorse for his father’s death, promising to keep him safe. While Mary returns to her apartment, Danny is captured by Tom’s men and brought to him. Confirming that Mary killed his father, Tom informs her that he has Danny, and she arrives to save him, single-handedly killing all his men. Freeing Danny, she and Tom find themselves in a standoff, but Mary walks away. Tom fires at her, and Mary shoots him in the chest, finishing him off with a bullet to the head. Outside, Mary reunites with Danny; as the credits roll, they drive away to a new life together.


== Cast ==
Taraji P. Henson as Mary Goodwin
Jahi Di'Allo Winston as Danny
Billy Brown as Tom Spencer
Danny Glover as Benny Spencer
Xander Berkeley as Uncle
Neal McDonough as Walter
Margaret Avery as Mina
Rade Serbedzija as Luka
Erik LaRay Harvey as Reggie


== Production ==
In January 2017, Taraji P. Henson signed on to star in Proud Mary with Screen Gems still looking to secure a director for an April 2017 principal production start in Boston. In February 2017, the film received a January 26, 2018, release date and Babak Najafi signed on to direct.On April 5, 2017, the rest of the cast was announced as the film commenced principal production. On July 20, 2017, the first official trailer for the film was released along with a teaser poster. A new release date of January 12, 2018, was also confirmed.


== Release ==


=== Box office ===
In the United States and Canada, Proud Mary was released on January 12, 2018, alongside The Commuter and Paddington 2, as well as the wide expansion of The Post, and was projected to gross around $20 million from 2,125 theaters in opening weekend. It made $3.2 million on its first day and $10 million over the weekend, finishing 8th at the box office and last among the new releases.


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 26% based on 74 reviews, and an average rating of 4.20/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Proud Mary proves Taraji P. Henson has more than enough attitude and charisma to carry an action movie—just not, unfortunately, one this indifferently assembled." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 35 out of 100, based on 23 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale.


== See also ==
List of black films of the 2010s


== References ==


== External links ==
Proud Mary at IMDb