Pumpkinhead: Blood Feud is a 2007 American made-for-television slasher Horror film  and the fourth installment in the Pumpkinhead franchise of horror films. The film is written and directed by Michael Hurst.


== Plot ==
The film begins with two men on their motorcycles driving away from Pumpkinhead. One of the men hits a tree branch in their path, falling from his motorcycle and allowing Pumpkinhead to catch up to him. As the man is being killed, the film cuts to a man in a log cabin who seems to share the pain inflicted by Pumpkinhead on the fallen man. The surviving man, named Dallas, rides to the log cabin, and the man who conjured Pumpkinhead, begging him to call the demon off. Pumpkinhead smashes through the window and Dallas attempts to fend him off by shooting him with a small pistol with little effect, and is clawed in the chest by the demon. When Dallas realizes that his bullets have no effect on Pumpkinhead, he swears to take the summoner with him, shooting the man and killing him, causing Pumpkinhead to vanish. Ed Harley then appears telling Dallas that Pumpkinhead will return and there will be no place to hide.
Five years later we are shown the family of the Hatfields' and McCoys' ongoing feud started because of a car in the 1930s. The Hatfields then trash the McCoy wedding. Jody Hatfield sneaks out to see her true love, Ricky McCoy. Ricky brings his sister, Sarah, to look out for him and Jody. The two then start to make out.
Jody's brothers find and kill Sarah by accident and try to kill Ricky. Ricky then finds his sister's body and goes to Haggis for help. Haggis tells him of the price it costs to summon Pumpkinhead and Haggis is shown talking to Ed Harley's spirit. Haggis states that her choice does not matter in the end; only the summoner may make the decision to kill Pumpkinhead. The two invoke Pumpkinhead to kill the Hatfields.
At the end of the film most of the Hatfields are killed, as well as some of the McCoy family. Ricky realizes what he has done and takes Pumpkinhead with him to fall down a well. This is the first film in the franchise that does not imply that Pumpkinhead is still alive.


== Cast ==
Bob Gunter as Pumpkinhead
Amy Manson as Jody Hatfield
Bradley Taylor as Ricky McCoy
Claire Lams as Dolly Hatfield
Rob Freeman as Sheriff Dallas Pope
Ovidiu Niculescu as Bobby Joe Hatfield
Peter Barnes as Papa McCoy
Lance Henriksen as Ed Harley
Elvin Dandel as Tristan McCoy
Richard Durden as Old Man Hatfield
Alin Constantinescu as Emmett Hatfield
Razvan Oprea as Brett Hatfield
Rudy Rosenfeld as Abner Hatfield
Lynne Verrall as Haggis
Calin Puia as Tommy Hatfield
Elias Ferkin as Billy Bob Hatfield
Iulia Boros as Mama McCoy
Maria Roman as Sara McCoy
Bart Sidles as Andy Mills
Alexandru Geoana as Town Boy #1
Cristi Feter as Johnson
Fanel Ursu as Johnny Pope
Aurel Boata as Charlie Hatfield
Daniel Tomescu as Dale Hatfield
Dicu Marian as Wayne Hatfield
Ion Carangea as Jimmy Langford
Florin Barcun as Danny Hatfield
Adrian Pavlovschi as Hatfield Boy #1
Daniel Pasleaga as Hatfield Boy #2
Mihai Ionita as McCoy Boy #1
Vasilescu Valentin as McCoy Boy #2
Isabela Melinte as Young McCoy Girl #1
Catalina Alexandru as Young McCoy Girl #2


== Production ==
Initially announced as Pumpkinhead 4, it was filmed in Bucharest, Romania back-to-back with another sequel titled Pumpkinhead 3. The films were renamed Pumpkinhead: Blood Feud and Pumpkinhead: Ashes to Ashes, respectively, before their release.
Talks of another Pumpkinhead sequel were briefly considered, but these plans were abandoned in favor of a reboot to the franchise.


== Release ==
Pumpkinhead: Blood Feud premiered in Dayton, Ohio, on February 2, 2007.  It then made its broadcast premiere on Syfy on February 10, 2007.  It was released on DVD on October 2, 2007.


== Reception ==
Jon Condit of Dread Central rated it 3/5 stars and wrote that it is modestly entertaining.  David Johnson of DVD Verdict wrote: "It's an adequate horror flick that maybe thinks it's a little more awesome than it actually is, but the sum total of the copious bloodletting and fun, old-school creature effects equals 'not a waste of time'".


== References ==


== External links ==
Pumpkinhead: Blood Feud at IMDb