Recess: School's Out (also known as Recess: The Movie – School's Out) is a 2001 American animated comedy adventure film based on the Disney television series Recess, and features the voices of Andrew Lawrence, Rickey D'Shon Collins, Jason Davis, Ashley Johnson, Courtland Mead, Pamela Adlon, Dabney Coleman, Melissa Joan Hart, April Winchell, and James Woods.
The film centers around T.J. Detweiler and his friends uncovering a plot to get rid of summer vacation taking place at their school. It was produced by Walt Disney Pictures, Walt Disney Television Animation and Walt Disney Television Animation Digital Production with animation done by Sunwoo Animation and Sunwoo Digital International.
The film was distributed by Buena Vista Pictures Distribution, premiered on February 10, 2001, and released theatrically in the United States on February 16, 2001.


== Plot ==
In the Nevada desert, a group of men break into a military base and steal a top-secret project, intending to use Third Street School as their HQ. Meanwhile, T.J. Detweiler and his friends pull one last prank before school closes for the summer and get away with it. T.J. is looking forward to spending summer with his friends, but he is shocked to learn that they’ve all decided to go to different summer camps. The next day while riding around town alone, T.J. notices strange activity going on at the school before being chased off by an aggressive bald man named Kojak. Investigating further the next day, he sees some scientists inside using a tractor beam to levitate a safe. He tells his parents and the police, but neither believe him. He then goes to Principal Prickly for advice, but the latter is dematerialized when he puts his key in the lock, leaving only his shoes behind. Desperate, T.J. blackmails his older sister Becky to drive him to each of the camps to pick up his friends.
T.J. and his friends obtain a box from one of the vehicles at the school, only to find inconsequential school documents inside. T.J.’s friends scold him for wasting their time until they witness a giant laser device emerge from the school and Kojak disguised as Prickly, proving T.J.’s suspicions true. They then work out a plan involving going to camp during the day and meeting up at night. The following day, T.J. finds Prickly’s golf pants in the dumpster, with a note reading “Help Me!” in the pocket; T.J. and his friends infiltrate the school that night to rescue Prickly, unaware that school snitch Randall Weems overheard their plans. Randall informs the school deputy principal Muriel Finster, who intends to catch T.J. and his friends in the act. Inside the school, the kids discover the auditorium has been turned into a laboratory and are caught after Mikey burps. T.J. is captured by the guards while his friends run away, an act witnessed by a flabbergasted Finster and Randall. T.J. is then locked inside the stock room, where he finds Prickly bound and gagged. Prickly and T.J. soon learn that the man who is currently overseeing the operation inside the school is none other than Dr. Phillium Benedict, Prickly's best friend from the 1960's.
Prickly tells T.J. the background of Benedict: in 1968, he, Finster and Benedict went to teacher training; Finster was Benedict's girlfriend at that time. When Benedict was appointed Principal of Third Street School, he decided to abolish recess as a way to improve test grades, though this was met with a protest filled with furious parents. Prickly reported to the superintendent to encourage Benedict to rescind, but Benedict refused to change his mind, prompting the superintendent to fire Benedict and promote Prickly as the new principal, as well as Finster to dump Benedict out of disgust for his cruel plans. Swearing revenge on Prickly for his losses, Benedict went into politics, soon becoming secretary of education until he was fired by the President when he tried to abolish recess again nationwide.
T.J.’s friends look through several of Benedict's notes inside the box, where Spinelli acquires a date book that mentions lunar perigee (taking place at 12:22 pm the next day). Gretchen realizes that the device they saw is a tractor beam and deduces that Benedict plans to use it to move the moon when it gets close to Earth. The next morning, Benedict reveals to Prickly and T.J. of his true plan: he intends to use the tractor beam to create a new permanent Ice Age that will end summer and force kids to stay indoors to study. Meanwhile, T.J.’s friends persuade Becky to drive them to the camps and pick up all the other students. Gus takes charge and concocts a plan to invade the school. The plan succeeds, and most of Benedict’s henchmen are defeated.
Prickly and the students then confront Benedict in the auditorium, but he summons more guards to stop them. However, Finster bursts in along with the teachers to save Prickly and the students, and a battle ensues. Benedict attempts to activate the beam himself, but is punched by Prickly, causing him to fall on and activate the beam, with Prickly being unable to reverse it. T.J. gives his baseball to Vince and has him throw it at the machine, destroying it. Benedict and his henchmen are arrested for their crimes.
As the students and teachers are praised by the media for thwarting Benedict's plot, T.J.’s friends decide to spend their summer with him, and T.J. goes to Prickly’s office to thank him; Prickly thanks T.J. for reminding him that he started teaching to help kids. T.J. then leaves with his friends as Prickly puts on his peace symbol necklace from 1968, then warmly reminds T.J. he’s still going to be in trouble for his earlier prank when September comes.


== Cast ==


== Music ==


=== Soundtrack ===


== Home media ==
Recess: School's Out, was released on VHS and DVD on August 7, 2001. As of November 12, 2019, the film, along with the series, is available to stream on Disney+.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
The film earned $36.7 million in North America and another $7.8 million from other countries. The worldwide gross was $44.5 million, against a $23 million budget. The film was released in the United Kingdom on July 27, 2001, and opened on #7.


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, a review aggregator, the film has an approval rating of 60% based on 70 reviews, with an average rating is 5.8/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Though basically a television cartoon stretched out to movie length, Recess has enough successful jokes and smart writing to make it a worthwhile view." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 43 out of 100, based on 20 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale.
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times, gave the film a two and a half stars out of four, saying, "Parents may find it amusing, but it doesn't have the two track versatility of Rugrats in Paris, which worked for kids on one level, and adults on another." Bob McCabe of Empire Magazine, gave the film a one out of five stars and said, "Even if it did keep the ankle biters quiet for an hour or so, this still wouldn't be worth your money."Common Sense Media gave the film a two out of four stars and said: "Simply a TV episode blown up for the big screen."


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Recess: School's Out at IMDb
Recess: School's Out at the TCM Movie Database
Recess: School's Out at Box Office Mojo
Recess: School's Out at The Big Cartoon DataBase