Roger Dodger is a 2002 American comedy-drama that explores the relationship between men, women, and sex. Directed by Dylan Kidd and starring Campbell Scott, Jesse Eisenberg, Isabella Rossellini, Elizabeth Berkley and Jennifer Beals. The film follows Roger Swanson (Scott) and his nephew (Eisenberg) during a night on the town in search of sex.


== Plot ==
After cynical New York advertising copywriter Roger Swanson (Campbell Scott) is dumped by his on-again/off-again girlfriend, Joyce (Isabella Rossellini) — who is also his boss — his painful workday is further complicated by the unexpected arrival of his 16-year-old nephew, Nick (Jesse Eisenberg). After asking to spend the night at Roger's, Nick reveals that he has come to ask for help—in hopes of ditching his virginal status, Nick begs Roger for a lesson in the art of seduction. Embittered Roger then takes on the role of a nocturnal drill sergeant in an imaginary war between the sexes, starting Nick's training at an upscale singles bar. There they meet two beautiful women (Elizabeth Berkley and Jennifer Beals) who turn out to be less malleable than Roger expects.
Although this first attempt to seduce women is unsuccessful, Nick chooses to continue the quest, which takes them to a  party at Joyce's. There they find Joyce's secretary drunk and attempt to capitalize. Once in the bedroom Nick's conscience gets the better of him and he allows her to fall asleep untouched.
With Roger spinning out of control and Nick's window of opportunity closing rapidly, they agree to go with the "Fail Safe" plan. This turns out to be an underground brothel. At the underground location Roger finds he cannot let Nick lose his virginity in such an emotionally barren atmosphere, and drags him back to his apartment to sleep things off. The following day, Roger hears his sister's message from his answering machine saying that no one has seen her son Nick for two days, so Roger tells Nick to call Nick's mom. Nick travels back to Ohio, but a while later, Roger shows up unexpectedly to tutor Nick and his classmates on their home turf, bonding with the younger men in a more potent way in an atmosphere populated by adolescent peers.
At the closing, it is left open which way Nick will go.


== Cast ==
Campbell Scott as Roger Swanson
Jesse Eisenberg as Nick
Isabella Rossellini as Joyce
Elizabeth Berkley as Andrea
Jennifer Beals as Sophie
Ben Shenkman as Donovan
Mina Badie as Donna
Chris Stack as Chris


== Release ==
The film opened the San Diego Film Festival on September 18, 2002.


== Reception ==
The film was not a major commercial success, but was critically well received, winning multiple awards in 2002–03. It also served as the coming-out for Jesse Eisenberg, who was widely acclaimed for his conflicted performance.
Rotten Tomatoes gives the film 88% based on 122 reviews—the site's consensus states: "The movie could have benefited from a more experienced director, but a great cast and script overcome any first time jitters the director may have had." On Metacritic, the film had an average score of 75 out of 100, based on 33 reviews.


== References ==


== External links ==
Roger Dodger at IMDb
Roger Dodger at AllMovie
Roger Dodger at Box Office Mojo
Roger Dodger at Rotten Tomatoes
Roger Dodger at Metacritic