Safe House is a 2012 American action thriller film directed by Daniel Espinosa. The film follows Matt Weston (Ryan Reynolds), a CIA officer on a low-level posting in Cape Town who is in charge of a safe house where the CIA is interrogating Tobin Frost (Washington), a veteran operative who has allegedly betrayed the agency. When the safe house is attacked by mercenaries who kill almost all the operatives, Weston flees with Frost in his charge, and they end up on the run. As the team of killers, who seem to be one step ahead of the pair, track them throughout Cape Town, Weston begins to wonder who to trust.
The film was released on February 10, 2012, in North America by Universal Pictures. Filming took place in Cape Town, South Africa. The film premiered in New York City on February 7, 2012, and was released in US theaters on February 10, 2012. The film received mixed reviews, with praise for Washington and Reynolds' performances, but criticisms for the screenplay and editing on the action scenes. The film earned $208 million worldwide against its $85 million budget.


== Plot ==
In Cape Town, South Africa, junior CIA officer Matt Weston is serving as a "housekeeper", an operative in charge of securing and maintaining a local CIA safe house in case of an operation. He calls his mentor and immediate superior, David Barlow, and inquires about a station in Paris, where he hopes to follow his live-in girlfriend Ana, a French medical student about to start her residency. Barlow tells him he is likely underqualified for the position, which frustrates Matt as he has not had a "houseguest" during his year long tenure, and thus has been unable to gain field experience. Barlow promises to revisit the issue in a few months. 
Elsewhere in Cape Town, ex-CIA NOC operative turned international criminal Tobin Frost acquires a data storage device from rogue MI6 officer Alec Wade. A team of mercenaries attacks them and kills Wade. Frost flees and, out of options, surrenders to the American consulate.
A team led by veteran Daniel Kiefer transfers Frost to Weston's safe house in order to interrogate him for intelligence before he is returned to the US. Weston watches uneasily as Kiefer's team waterboards Frost. The mercenaries, led by Vargas, attack the safe house and kill Kiefer and his team. Weston escapes with Frost.
Weston contacts Barlow at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, along with Catherine Linklater, the operative in charge of Frost's interrogation and Kiefer's superior, and CIA Deputy Director Harlan Whitford, who is overseeing the operation. Linklater orders Weston to lay low and await further instructions.
Frost begins to manipulate Weston, insisting that someone within the CIA gave away their location to the mercenaries and that Weston will be forced to take the fall if things go wrong. Weston contacts Ana, giving her a cover story that his office has been threatened and suggesting she stay with friends when it appears their apartment is under surveillance. Barlow tells Weston to go to Cape Town Stadium where he retrieves a GPS device containing the location of another safe house, but Frost creates a diversion and escapes. Weston, detained by the police, escapes and is forced to fire at them.
Weston contacts Langley to report Frost's escape. After hearing that Weston fired at the police, Linklater orders him to visit the nearest American embassy for debriefing. When Whitford tells him "we'll take it from here", Weston decides to pursue Frost himself as Frost had warned him that when he heard that phrase, that was when Weston should become concerned about his own safety. Linklater and Barlow go to South Africa themselves. En route, Linklater suggests that Weston has joined Frost, which Barlow refutes. Weston meets with Ana and admits he is in the CIA, urging her to return to Paris and to tell anyone who asks that they broke up weeks ago in order to protect her.
Weston tracks Frost to a township in Langa, where Frost meets Carlos Villar, an old friend and document forger, who provides him with travel documents but suggests that he leave his life of crime behind. Vargas' team attacks again, killing Carlos and his family, but Weston helps Frost escape. Weston brutally interrogates one of Vargas' wounded mercenaries, who reveals that Vargas is working for the CIA, which is seeking to retrieve the storage device from Frost. As they bandage their wounds, Frost urges Weston not to kill innocent people, telling the story of how he was forced to kill an air traffic controller while on a mission. He later learned that he was simply part of a plot to assassinate a whistle-blower who would expose wetwork committed by the CIA.
Weston takes Frost to the new safe house, where Weston keeps the housekeeper, Keller, at gunpoint. Keller attacks and severely wounds Weston before Weston kills him. Frost reveals the device contains evidence of corruption and bribery involving the CIA, MI6, and other intelligence agencies, put together from a Mossad intelligence report. Frost leaves Weston, who passes out from blood loss.
Meanwhile, Linklater arrives in South Africa and informs Barlow of the device's existence, but not its contents. Barlow kills her and travels to the safe house where he reveals that he is Vargas' employer. He confirms that the file contains incriminating evidence against him, and encourages Weston to lie about what has happened. Frost returns and kills Vargas' team but is fatally wounded by Barlow. Weston then shoots and kills Barlow. As he dies, Frost gives Weston the file, saying he is a better man than Frost.
Back in the United States, Weston meets with Director Whitford, who informs Weston that unflattering facts about the CIA must be removed from his report, but that he will be promoted. He asks Weston about the file's location but Weston denies knowing about it. Whitford states that whoever has those files will have many enemies. Weston assures Whitford that he will "take it from here,“ visibly shaking Whitford, and leaves. He leaks the files to the media, incriminating personnel from many intelligence agencies, including Whitford. Weston travels to Paris and covertly observes Ana while she sits with friends in a cafe. She notices him across the street and smiles before he walks away, content that she is safe.


== Cast ==
Denzel Washington as Tobin Frost
Ryan Reynolds as Matt Weston
Vera Farmiga as Catherine Linklater
Brendan Gleeson as David Barlow
Sam Shepard as Harlan Whitford
Rubén Blades as Carlos Villar
Nora Arnezeder as Ana Moreau
Robert Patrick as Daniel Kiefer
Liam Cunningham as Alec Wade
Joel Kinnaman as Keller
Fares Fares as Vargas


== Soundtrack ==
Ramin Djawadi composed the score to the film.


=== Track listing ===
All music by Ramin Djawadi.
Songs used in the film but not included in the soundtrack album were:

"Rebel Blues" performed by Lëk Sèn
"No Church in the Wild" performed by Kanye West & Jay-Z featuring Frank Ocean


== Release ==
The film premiered in New York City on February 7, 2012, and was released in U.S. theaters on February 10, 2012. Safe House was released to Blu-ray and DVD on June 5, 2012 in the United States.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
The film grossed $126,373,434 in North America and $81,702,771 in other territories, for a worldwide total of $208,076,205.
Safe House earned $13.6 million on opening day, and $40.1 million over the weekend including $10.5 million overseas, ranking in second place to The Vow. The film was Denzel Washington's second-biggest opener, behind American Gangster ($43,565,115) and Ryan Reynolds' fourth-biggest opener, behind Deadpool ($132.4 million), X-Men Origins: Wolverine ($85,058,003) and Green Lantern ($53,174,303). In its second weekend, it became #1 at the box office with $23,641,575, beating The Vow. It was the second film in 2012 to cross the $100 million mark domestically behind The Vow and the fourth film to cross the $100 million mark worldwide behind Underworld: Awakening, Journey 2: The Mysterious Island, and The Vow.


=== Critical response ===
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 52% based on 189 reviews; the average rating is 5.72/10. The site's consensus reads, "Safe House stars Washington and Reynolds are let down by a thin script and choppily edited action sequences." On Metacritic the film holds an average weighted score of 52 out of 100 based on 36 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale.


== Possible sequel ==
In September 2012, it was announced that Universal had hired screenwriter David Guggenheim to write a script for a possible sequel.


== References ==


== External links ==
Safe House at IMDb
Safe House at Rotten Tomatoes
Safe House at Box Office Mojo