Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed (also referred to as  Scooby-Doo 2) is a 2004 American live-action/computer-animated horror comedy film based on the animated television franchise Scooby-Doo. It is the second installment in the Scooby-Doo live-action film series and a sequel to 2002's Scooby-Doo, and was directed by Raja Gosnell, written by James Gunn, and released by Warner Bros. Pictures. The film stars Freddie Prinze Jr., Sarah Michelle Gellar, Linda Cardellini, Matthew Lillard, Seth Green, Tim Blake Nelson, Peter Boyle and Alicia Silverstone, with Neil Fanning reprising his role as the voice of Scooby-Doo. 
The film was released on March 26, 2004. Like the first film, it received generally negative reviews from critics and grossed $181 million, considerably less than its predecessor. Its poor reception resulted in a third film, set to be written and directed by Gunn, being cancelled.


== Plot ==
Fred, Daphne, Velma, Shaggy and Scooby-Doo attend the opening of an exhibition at the Coolsonian Criminology Museum commemorating their past solved cases with monster costumes on display. However, the event is interrupted by the Evil Masked Figure, who steals two costumes using the reanimated Pterodactyl Ghost. The entire gang is ridiculed by journalist Heather Jasper Howe, who starts a smear campaign against them. Concluding that an old enemy of theirs is the mastermind and seeking revenge, the gang begin revisiting old cases. Dismissing the former Pterodactyl Ghost, Doctor Jonathan Jacobo, due to his apparent death during a failed prison escape three years ago, they suspect Jeremiah Wickles, the Black Knight Ghost and Jacobo's cellmate who was recently released, as the culprit. Scooby and Shaggy, after overhearing the rest of the gang criticizing their tendency to bumble every operation, and especially their most recent offense in failing to secure the Pterodactyl Ghost at the museum, resolve to better themselves and act like real detectives.
Going to Wickles' mansion, the group fall through a trapdoor and into a cage targeting unwelcome callers, but escape with the aid of Daphne's cosmetics. Inside, the gang find an ancient Celtic text that serves as an instruction manual on how to create monsters through a combination of magic and science. Scooby-Doo and Shaggy find a note inviting Wickles to visit the Faux Ghost nightclub and are attacked by the Black Knight Ghost, but escape when Daphne fights him off while Velma discovers its weak spot and disables it. Before fleeing, the rest of the gang had previously discovered through the book found in Wickles' mansion that the key ingredient to creating the monsters was a substance called "randomonium", the byproduct of certain silver mines such as Coolsville's old mining town. Daphne, Velma and Fred go to the museum accompanied by the curator Patrick Wisely, but discover that the rest of the costumes have been stolen. Heather Jasper Howe turns the city against them.
Following the lead from Wickles' note, their first clue ever, Scooby and Shaggy sneak into the Faux Ghost wearing disguises to try and solve the mystery, only to discover it's a hangout for all the villains Mystery Inc. had unmasked in the past. After speaking to Wickles, they learn that he has abandoned his evil ways. Scooby goes dancing, but his disguise falls off and the two escape through a trash chute. On their way out, they spot Patrick uncharacteristically threatening someone who appears to be a member of his staff, ordering him to find answers to who vandalized his museum. Escaping an awkward interaction with Patrick, Scooby and Shaggy spot Wickles leaving the club and follow him. Daphne, Velma and Fred go to the mines, finding Wickles presenting plans to turn it into a summer camp for children to a group of investors. When they confront Wickles, he states that he and Jacobo hated each other for various petty reasons, and that he has no connection to the museum robberies.
The gang then find the Monster Hive, where the costumes are brought to life as real monsters. Shaggy and Scooby play around with the machine's control panel, accidentally bringing several costumes to life, and the gang flees with the panel as the Evil Masked Figure terrorizes the city. Escaping to their old high school clubhouse, the gang realizes that they can reverse the control panel's power by altering its wiring, destroying the monsters in the process. However, Captain Cutler's Ghost emerges from the nearby lake and forces the gang to head back to the mines, encountering the various monsters along the way. When Velma tries to give Scooby and Shaggy the control panel, they refuse to take it, believing that they will once again ruin everything and admit their feelings of inadequacy compared to the rest of the gang. Velma convinces them they are fine just the way they are and that they have both been heroes in their own way all along. After escaping the Skeleton Men, Velma finds a shrine dedicated to Jacobo built by Patrick. Eventually, Patrick finds her and proves his innocence by helping her after a catwalk gives way underneath her, but he is captured by the Pterodactyl Ghost.
The gang finally confronts the Evil Masked Figure as the Tar Monster captures everyone except Scooby, who uses a fire extinguisher to freeze the Tar Monster's body. He reconnects the control panel and activates it, turning the monsters back into costumes. The gang takes the Evil Masked Figure to the authorities, with Velma and Daphne unmasking them as Heather Jaspar Howe. When asked for Heather's motive for committing her crimes, Velma suddenly pulls Heather's face off, revealing her to actually be Johnathan Jacobo in disguise, who had survived his failed prison escape; Velma explains that she realised Jacobo was still alive after finding a newspaper clipping showing him in front of the museum, the construction of which had begun a year after his apparent death. Jacobo and his accomplice Ned are arrested and Mystery Inc. are praised as heroes once more. In the Faux Ghost, the gang celebrates their victory with the reformed criminals as the movie ends.


== Cast ==


=== Live action ===
Freddie Prinze Jr. as Fred Jones
Ryan Vrba as Young Fred
Sarah Michelle Gellar as Daphne Blake
Emily Tennant as Young Daphne
Matthew Lillard as Shaggy Rogers
Cascy Beddow as Young Shaggy
Nazanin Afshin-Jam as Shaggy Chick
Linda Cardellini as Velma Dinkley
Lauren Kennedy as Young Velma
Seth Green as Patrick Wisely
Peter Boyle as Jeremiah Wickles
Tim Blake Nelson as Dr. Jonathan Jacobo
Alicia Silverstone as Heather Jasper Howe
Karin Konoval as Aggie Wilkins
Joe MacLeod as Skater Dude No. 1
Brandon Jay McLaren as Skater Dude No. 2
Rasmus Nøhr as Skater Dude No. 3
Calum Worthy as Kid on Bike
Stephen E. Miller as C.L. Magnus
Zahf Paroo as Ned
Christopher R. Sumpton as Zombie
C. Ernst Harth as Miner 49er
Kevin Durand as Black Knight Ghost


=== Voice cast ===
Neil Fanning as Scooby-Doo, Tasmanian Devil
J. P. Manoux as Scooby Brainiac
Scott McNeil as Evil Masked Figure
Dee Bradley Baker as the voice of Pterodactyl / Zombie / Red-Eyed Skeleton
Bob Papenbrook as the voice of Black Knight Ghost
Michael Sorich as the voice of Tar Monster / Cotton Candy Glob
Terrence Stone/Dee Bradley Baker as the voice of 10,000 Volt Ghost
Wally Wingert as the voice of Green-Eyed Skeleton


=== Cameos ===
Pat O'Brien
Tasmanian Devil
Ruben Studdard
Kester Moorhouse
Big Brovaz


== Production ==
In June 2002, at the time of the release of Scooby-Doo, Dan Fellman, the president of Warner Bros., confirmed that a sequel was in the works, and was slated for a 2004 release. In March 2003, it was announced that Freddie Prinze Jr., Sarah Michelle Gellar, Neil Fanning, Matthew Lillard and Linda Cardellini would reprise their roles in the sequel. In April 2003, the next month, filming for the sequel began in Vancouver, with Seth Green joining the cast.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
The film opened March 26, 2004, and grossed $29.4 million (over 3,312 theaters, $8,888 average) during its opening weekend, ranking No. 1. It grossed a total of $84.2 million in North America, and went on to earn $181.5 million worldwide, more than $90 million less than the $275.7 million worldwide Scooby-Doo grossed two years earlier. It was the twenty eighth most successful film of 2004, and ranks as the sixth highest-grossing film featuring a dog as a major character. The film was released in the United Kingdom on April 2, 2004, and topped the country's box office for the next three weekends, before being dethroned by Kill Bill: Volume 2.


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a rating of 22% based on 119 reviews and an average rating of 4.3/10. The site's consensus reads: "Only the very young will get the most out of this silly trifle." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 34 out of 100 based on 28 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale, an improvement over the previous film's "B+".Roger Ebert of the Chicago Times gave the film two stars out of four, stating, "This is a silly machine to whirl goofy antics before the eyes of easily distracted audiences, and it is made with undeniable skill." Dave Kehr of The New York Times gave the film a negative review, saying, "In the strictly secular-humanist world of Scooby-Doo, there are no real ghosts, but only humans desperate for attention who disguise themselves as supernatural figures."Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian gave the film a two out of five stars, stating, "it's straight down the line family fare, nothing inspired, nothing objectionable: a few funny lines." Nick DeSemlyn of Empire Magazine also gave the film two out of five stars, saying, "This sequel is a step up from the first. Scooby's animation is improved, there are some fun action sequences and a smattering of amusing moments. But the same manic mugging that spoiled the original mars this movie, and the result is a film only a six year-old on a sugar rush could love" Common Sense Media gave the film two out of five stars, saying, "Sequel is milder than original; potty humor, peril, violence."
The film won the Razzie Award for Worst Remake or Sequel.


== Home media ==
Warner Home Video released the film on DVD and VHS on September 14, 2004, in both full-screen and widescreen editions. The DVD included deleted scenes from the film's production and other special features, such as two music videos, a "making of" and trailers. On November 9, 2010, Warner Bros. released both the film and its predecessor as a double feature Blu-ray.


== Video games ==
Two video games loosely following the plot of the film were released in 2004 to coincide with the film's release; a 3D point and click adventure on the PC and a 2D beat 'em up platformer on the Game Boy Advance. In both games, one ending could only be seen by entering a code displayed at the end of the film after the credits.


== Soundtrack ==
A soundtrack was released on March 23, 2004, on compact disc and cassette tape.

"Don't Wanna Think About You" by Simple Plan (Simple Plan had also performed the titular theme song)
"You Get What You Give" by New Radicals
"Boom Shack-A-Lak" by Apache Indian
"Thank You (Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin)" by Big Brovaz
"The Rockafeller Skank" by Fatboy Slim
"Wooly Bully" by Bad Manners
"Shining Star" by Ruben Studdard
"Flagpole Sitta" by Harvey Danger
"Get Ready for This" by 2 Unlimited
"Play That Funky Music" by Wild Cherry
"Here We Go" by Bowling for Soup
"Love Shack" by The B-52's
"Friends Forever" by Puffy AmiYumi
"Scooby-Doo, Where Are You?" by MxPx


== Cancelled sequel ==
In October 2002, during the filming of Scooby-Doo 2, Warner Bros. approved production of a third film. Dan Forman and Paul Foley were hired to write the script for Scooby-Doo 3. In August 2004, Matthew Lillard said in an interview that the third Scooby-Doo film was canceled because the second had not done as well as expected, which he attributed to Warner Bros. releasing it at an inappropriate time. In a 2019 interview, James Gunn revealed that he was set to write and direct but the film did not happen due to the financial disappointment of the previous film, stating, "although it did well, it didn't do well enough to warrant a third, so the movie was never made." Gunn tweeted the plot for the canceled film that "The Mystery Inc. gang are hired by a town in Scotland who complain they are being plagued by monsters but we discover throughout the film the monsters are actually the victims. Scooby and Shaggy have to come to terms with their own prejudices and narrow belief systems."


== References ==


== External links ==
Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed at AllMovie
Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed at IMDb
Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed at Rotten Tomatoes
Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed at Metacritic