She's Out of My League is a 2010 American romantic comedy  film directed by Jim Field Smith and written by Sean Anders and John Morris. The film stars Jay Baruchel and Alice Eve, and was produced by Jimmy Miller and David Householter for Paramount Pictures and DreamWorks Pictures and filmed in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Production on the film finished in 2008. The film received its wide theatrical release on March 12, 2010. It is the first feature film directed by Smith.


== Plot ==
Kirk Kettner is a TSA agent at Pittsburgh International Airport. He attempts to reconcile with his ex-girlfriend Marnie, despite her treating him poorly. Meanwhile, attractive woman Molly McCleish, arrives at the terminal to board a flight. Kirk is the only TSA agent who does not flirt with or attempt to harass her. After boarding, she calls her cell phone accidentally left behind at security, Kirk answers it and arranges to return it the following evening.
Kirk and his friend Devon arrive at the Andy Warhol Museum the following evening to return Molly's phone. While there, Kirk is wrongly accused of spilling a drink on the museum director and is asked leave. Molly feels bad and offers Kirk tickets to a Pittsburgh Penguins hockey game. Kirk brings his friend, Stainer, to the game, where they meet Molly and her friend Patty. While Stainer and Molly are away from their seats, Patty tells Kirk that Molly is interested in him.
Molly asks Kirk out a few days later and he agrees. Stainer predicts their relationship will fail, he refers to Molly as a "10", and Kirk as a "5", saying that is too big a difference. Patty meanwhile believes Molly has only chosen Kirk because he is "safe". While on their date, Kirk tells Molly that he dreams of becoming a pilot, while Molly shares her story of how she was once a lawyer before realizing her love for event planning. At the end of the night, they kiss in Kirk's car.
Molly accompanies Kirk to a family lunch, where she charms the men and makes Marnie jealous. After returning to Molly's apartment, while making out, Kirk ejaculates prematurely in his pants and moments later Molly's parents arrive. Desperate to conceal the stain on his pants, Kirk seems discourteous by not standing up to shake hands and leaves quickly. Believing he fled to avoid meeting her parents, Molly ignores Kirk's calls. Kirk tracks her down and admits the true reasons for his leaving and she forgives him. 
At Katie's 21st birthday party, Kirk is troubled by Molly being intentionally vague about Kirk's line of work to her parents. Molly's ex-boyfriend Cam, a stunt pilot, then arrives and alludes to Molly having a physical defect. After the party, they return to Molly's apartment and partially undress. Kirk discovers Molly's "defect" is slightly webbed toes, which Kirk considers so minor that he decides that she is indeed too perfect for him. Upset with Kirk over his insecurities and wishing that there was something wrong with her to justify them being together, Molly confesses that Cam had the same problem. She admits she asked Kirk out because she considered him safe, causing Kirk to break up with her. Kirk resumes his relationship with Marnie and makes plans to attend a family vacation in Branson together.
Later, Stainer asks an ex-girlfriend of his if he was good enough for her, she tells him that his insecurities caused her to end their relationship. Realizing he caused Kirk and Molly's break-up by telling Kirk that Molly was too good for him, Stainer phones Patty and gets her to bring Molly to the airport. Kirk meets Molly at the terminal gate, where she confesses Kirk's insecurities about himself are justified, but that she wants to be with him regardless. Stainer boards the airplane to find Kirk, and he prepares to find Molly. He is chased by Marnie but eventually finds Molly, they reconcile and resume their relationship.  
In the ending credits, Kirk surprises Molly with a mystery trip to Cleveland via small aircraft, as he has fulfilled his dream of becoming a pilot.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
Principal photography for the film commenced on March 31, 2008 at the Mellon Arena, now the former home of the Pittsburgh Penguins hockey team. Filming continued in various locations around Pittsburgh until the end of May 2008, including the Pittsburgh International Airport and The Andy Warhol Museum.  Mount Washington, the downtown Regional Enterprise Tower, PNC Park, Market Square, Century III Mall, and area sound stages were also used as locations for the film. Pluma's Restaurant in Irwin, Pennsylvania was used for bar scenes when shooting at Mellon Arena became impossible due to the Penguins' advancement to the 2008 Stanley Cup Finals. The film was co-produced by Jimmy Miller of Mosaic Media Group, a native of Castle Shannon, Pennsylvania and the brother of comedian Dennis Miller.Molly's parents, Mr. and Mrs. McCleish, are played by Alice Eve's real-life parents, Sharon Maughan and Trevor Eve.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
She's Out of My League grossed $32 million in North America and $17.8 million in other territories for a total gross of $49.8 million, against a budget of $20 million.The film opened at No. 3, behind Alice in Wonderland and Green Zone, with an estimated $9.6 million gross.


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 58% based on 131 reviews, with an average rating of 5.56/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "She’s Out of My League has moments of humor and insight, but it’s bogged down by excessive vulgarity and cartoonishness." On Metacritic the film has score of 46 out of 100, based on 29 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".Critic Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four saying, "The movie is not a comedy classic. But in a genre where so many movies struggle to lift themselves from zero to one, it's about, oh, a six point five."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film three stars out of four, commenting, "This R-rated blend of the sweet and the raunchy has its heart in the right place."  Jake Tomlinson of Shave Magazine gave the movie four and a half stars out of five and praised the movie "for not throwing in cheap obstacles" and for the "good soundtrack."
Michael O'Sullivan of The Washington Post was less enthused, giving the film one star out of four: "The movie clearly aspires to rise to the smutty-but-sweet synergy of other, better films. But She's Out of My League can't touch them."


== Home media ==
She's Out of My League was released on DVD and Blu-ray on June 22, 2010. As of October 2015, it has grossed $12.5 million in home video sales.


== References ==


== External links ==
She's Out of My League at IMDb
She's Out of My League at AllMovie
She's Out of My League at Box Office Mojo
She's Out of My League at Rotten Tomatoes