Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas (also known as Sinbad) is a 2003 American animated adventure film produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by DreamWorks Pictures. The film, which combines traditional animation with some computer animation, was directed by Tim Johnson and Patrick Gilmore (in the latter's directorial debut) and written by John Logan, and stars the voices of Brad Pitt, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Michelle Pfeiffer, and Joseph Fiennes. It covers the story of Sinbad (voiced by Pitt), a pirate who travels the sea with his dog and his loyal crew, alongside Marina (voiced by Zeta-Jones), the fiancée of his childhood friend Prince Proteus (voiced by Fiennes), to recover the stolen Book of Peace from Eris (voiced by Pfeiffer) to save Proteus from accepting Sinbad's death sentence. The film blends elements from the One Thousand and One Nights and classical mythology.
The film was released on July 2, 2003 and received mixed reviews from critics, who praised the voice performances but criticized the CGI animation and storyline. Grossing $80.8 million on a $60 million budget, Sinbad was a box office bomb. DreamWorks suffered a $125 million loss on a string of films, which nearly bankrupted the company. It is, to date, the final DreamWorks Animation film to use traditional animation, as the studio abandoned it in favor of computer animation. DreamWorks did, however, bring 2D animation back for the 5-minute short film Bird Karma in 2018.


== Plot ==
Sinbad and his pirate crew attempt to steal the magical Book of Peace that protects the kingdom of Syracuse, Sicily and hold it for ransom before retiring to Fiji. To Sinbad's surprise, he discovers the Book is protected while on board to Syracuse by his old friend, Prince Proteus, whom Sinbad had drifted away from without ever giving a reason. Proteus confronts Sinbad and appeals to his better nature, telling him to prove if their friendship ever meant anything to him, but Sinbad tries to steal the book regardless, only prevented from doing so when Cetus attacks the ship. The two team up to defeat Cetus, fighting together just like they used to, and reigniting the sparks of their old friendship until Sinbad is pulled into the ocean by the monster. Proteus goes to save Sinbad, but is stopped by his crew.
Underwater, Sinbad meets the beautiful Goddess of Discord, Eris, who offers him unimaginable riches in exchange for bringing the Book of Peace to her realm of Tartarus. Sinbad agrees, sailing to Syracuse with his crew to steal the Book, but has second thoughts after seeing Proteus with his fiancée, Lady Marina, and rounds up his crew to leave. Anticipating this, Eris impersonates Sinbad and steals the Book herself, framing the pirate for the theft. Sinbad is sentenced to death, whereupon Proteus sends Sinbad to retrieve the Book instead, trusting him to do the right thing and placing himself as a hostage, while Marina stows away to make sure that Sinbad keeps his word. To prevent them from succeeding, Eris sends a group of mythical sirens to entrance and seduce the men aboard Sinbad's ship to their death with their hypnotic singing voices. As the only one aboard unaffected, Marina navigates the ship to safety, saving the lives of the entire crew. While Marina is welcomed by the crew into their midst, Sinbad's pettiness causes the two to clash, especially when he remains too proud to acknowledge or even thank her for saving them. When Eris sends a Roc that captures Marina, Sinbad tries to rescue her, but inadvertently hampers Marina's escape. Managing to flee the Roc by chance, the two start to warm up to each other.
In a brief moment of peace, Marina reveals to Sinbad that she's always dreamed of a life on the sea, while Sinbad reveals that he distanced himself from Proteus a decade earlier because he fell in love with Marina, even though he knew she was to be married to Proteus. They then reach Tartarus, where Eris reveals that her plan was always to maneuver Proteus into Sinbad's place, thereby leaving Syracuse without an heir. When Sinbad insists on taking the Book back, she makes him a deal: if he answers one question truthfully, she will give him the Book and let them go, giving him her word that she will honour the bargain, and making it unbreakable to go back on, even for a goddess. When Sinbad accepts, Eris asks him what he will do if he doesn't get the Book: namely, if he will flee Syracuse to live with Marina or return to die in Proteus' place. When he answers that he will return, Eris calls him a liar, withholds the Book, and returns him and Marina to the mortal world. Ashamed, Sinbad admits that Eris is right, truly believing himself to be a selfish, black-hearted liar. While Marina pleads for Sinbad to flee and save his life, admitting her feelings for him, Sinbad makes the decision to return to Syracuse.
As the time allotted to Sinbad's return elapses, Proteus accepts his fate and readies himself to be beheaded. At the last minute, Sinbad arrives and takes his place, but is himself saved when an enraged Eris suddenly appears and shatters the executioner's sword. Stunned, Sinbad realizes that he upheld his end of the bargain after all and has beaten Eris by proving his answer to be true. Unable to go back on her word, Eris reluctantly surrenders the Book of Peace to Sinbad before leaving to sow chaos and discord elsewhere. With the true culprit of the theft revealed, Sinbad is absolved of the crime and pardoned by Dymas, the King of Syracuse.
With the Book restored to Syracuse, Sinbad and his crew prepare to leave on another voyage, leaving Marina behind with Proteus. Unbeknownst to him, Proteus sees that Marina has fallen deeply in love with Sinbad and life on the sea and frees her from their arranged engagement, sending her to join Sinbad's ship. Marina surprises Sinbad by revealing her presence on the ship just as it sets sail, and the two share a kiss. Now together, they and the crew set out on another long voyage as they sail into the sunset.


== Voice cast ==
Brad Pitt as Sinbad, an adventurous pirate and sailor who plans on retiring to Fiji.
Catherine Zeta-Jones as Lady Marina, the Thracian ambassador to Syracuse.
Michelle Pfeiffer as Eris, the beautiful and manipulative Goddess of Discord who wants to create destruction throughout the world.
Joseph Fiennes as Prince Proteus, Sinbad's noble childhood friend.
Dennis Haysbert as Kale, Sinbad's first mate.
Adriano Giannini as Rat, the Italian lookout of Sinbad's crew.
Timothy West as King Dymas, Prince Proteus' father and King of Syracuse.
Jim Cummings as Luca, an elderly member of Sinbad's crew.
Conrad Vernon as Jed, a heavily-armed member of Sinbad's crew.
Raman Hui as Jin, an Asian member of Sinbad's crew who frequently makes bets with Li.
Chung Chan as Li, an Asian member of Sinbad's crew who frequently makes bets with Jin.
Andrew Birch as Grum and Chum, members of Sinbad's crew.
Frank Welker as Spike, Sinbad's pet mastiff.
Chris Miller as Tower Guard.


== Production ==


=== Development ===
Shortly after co-writing Aladdin (1992) for Disney, screenwriters Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio came up with the idea of adapting the story of Sinbad the Sailor in the vein of the story of Damon and Pythias before settling on a love triangle. They wrote a treatment inspired by screwball romantic comedy films with Sinbad as a reserved apprentice cartographer who joins Peri, a free-spirited female smuggler, on an adventure and falls in love. In July 1992, Disney had announced they were adapting the story into a potential animated feature.Shortly after writing Gladiator (2000), John Logan was approached by Jeffrey Katzenberg to write the script for an animated film. When he was offered the story of Sinbad, Logan researched the multiple tales of the character before settling on depicting the Greek and Roman versions. He described his first draft script as "very complex, the relationships were very adult. It was too intense in terms of the drama for the audience that this movie was aimed at."


=== Casting ===
Russell Crowe was originally set to voice Sinbad, but he dropped out due to scheduling conflicts. He was replaced by Brad Pitt, who wanted to make a film his nieces and nephews could see. He explained, "They can't get into my movies. People's heads getting cut off, and all that." Pitt had already tried to narrate DreamWorks' previous animated film Spirit: Stallion of the Cimarron, but "it didn't work," with Matt Damon taking over the role. Pitt's purist intentions worried him that his Missourian accent would not be suitable for the Middle Eastern character, but was persuaded by the filmmakers that his accent would lighten the mood.Michelle Pfeiffer, who voices Eris, the Goddess of Discord, had struggles with pinning down the character's personality, initially finding her "too sexual," and then too dull. After the third rewrite, Pfeiffer called Jeffrey Katzenberg and told him, "You know, you really can fire me," but he assured her that this was just part of the process.


=== Animation ===
In January 2001, it was reported that DreamWorks Animation would completely transfer their animation workflow into using the Linux operating system. Previously, their animation and rendering software had used Silicon Graphics Image servers and workstations, but as their hardware began to show slowness, DreamWorks began looking for an alternate platform for superior optimal performance in order to save hardware costs. In 2002, they decided to partner with Hewlett-Packard for a three-year deal for which they used their dual-processor HP workstations and ProLiant servers running Red Hat Linux software. Starting with Spirit: Stallion of the Cimarron (2002), they had replaced its entire render farm with x86-based Linux servers.Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas was the first DreamWorks Animation production to completely utilize Linux software, with more than 250 workstations used. Starting with storyboards, the artists first drew sketches on paper to visualize the scene, which were later edited into animatics. For the character animation, rough character sketches were passed through the ToonShooter software, which digitized the sketches. From that point, the animators were able to easily integrate the animation into existing scenes. Production software lead Derek Chan explained, "ToonShooter is an internal tool we wrote for Linux. It captures low resolution 640 x 480 line art that the artists use to time the film." The animated characters were then digitally colored using the Linux software application, InkAndPaint.For the visual effects, DreamWorks Animation had used Autodesk Maya to create water effects. However, the rendering was found to be too photorealistic, and senior software engineer for advanced R&D future films Galen Gornowicz sought to modify the effects so as to closely match the movie's visual development renderings. Craig Ring, who served as digital supervisor on the film, described four major approaches to water used in the film: compositing ripple distortion over the painted backgrounds; creating fluid simulation; developing a rapid slashing technique to create a surface and then send ripples through the surface; and better integrating the 3D visual effects with stylized, hand drawn splashes.


== Release ==


=== Marketing ===
A PC game based on the film was released by Atari, who worked closely with one of the film's directors, Patrick Gilmore. It was released before the VHS and DVD release of the film. Burger King released six promotional toys at the time of the film's release, and each toy came with a "Constellation Card." Hasbro produced a series of Sinbad figures as part of its G.I. JOE action figure brand. The figures were 12" tall and came with a mythical monster.


=== Home media ===
Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas was released on DVD and VHS on November 18, 2003 by DreamWorks Home Entertainment. The DVD included a six-minute interactive short animated film Cyclops Island, featuring an encounter with the eponymous Cyclops. In July 2014, the film's distribution rights were purchased by DreamWorks Animation from Paramount Pictures (owners of the pre-2005 DreamWorks Pictures library) and transferred to 20th Century Fox before reverting to Universal Studios in 2018; Universal Pictures Home Entertainment subsequently released the film on Blu-ray Disc on June 4, 2019 with the Cyclops Island short removed.


==== Cyclops Island ====
Cyclops Island (also known as Sinbad and the Cyclops Island) is a traditionally animated interactive short film that acts as a sequel to Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas, taking place shortly after the events of the previous film.
Instead of travelling to Fiji, Sinbad and his crew decide to spend their vacation on the tropical island of Krakatoa. While attempting to find a source of fresh water on the island, Marina and Spike run into a tribe of Cyclops who they have to defeat with the help of Sinbad, Kale, and Rat. When Sinbad dislodges a large boulder during the fight, a volcano erupts and the island goes down in flames. Marina then suggests looking for a nicer destination for their next holiday, such as Pompeii.
While watching the short film on DVD, the viewer can choose to follow different characters to see different angles of the same story. The viewer can follow Sinbad, the duo of Kale and Rat, Marina, or Spike. Brad Pitt, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Dennis Haysbert, and Adriano Giannini all reprised their roles from the original film. On the film's VHS release, the short film takes place after the movie ends but before the credits roll, and is shown in its entirety.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 45% based on 128 reviews with an average rating of 5.63/10. The site's consensus reads: "Competent, but not magical." Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating, has a score of 48 based on 33 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews."Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter praised the film, writing that "Sinbad is a cartoon that does what matinée [afternoon showings] moviemakers of old never had the resources to do: allow their imagination to run amok in an ancient world that never existed―but should have." He praised the animation and backgrounds as "lushly rendered by the animation artists, displaying details not only from the world according to Ray Harryhausen; but from the Greco-Roman world and Middle East. As with all good animation, these serve as backdrops to the comedy and adventure the characters encounter every second." Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three-and-a-half stars, concluding that "Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas is another worthy entry in the recent renaissance of animation, and in the summer that has already given us Finding Nemo, it's a reminder that animation is the most liberating of movie genres, freed of gravity, plausibility, and even the matters of lighting and focus. There is no way that Syracuse could exist outside animation, and as we watch it, we are sailing over the edge of the human imagination."Claudia Puig, reviewing for USA Today, summarized that "Sinbad is a swashbuckling adventure saga that probably will appeal more to older kids. But it's not a wondrous tale. The effects are competent, the action has exciting moments, and the story is interesting enough, but the parts don't add up to a compelling sum." Todd McCarthy of Variety wrote, "A passably entertaining animated entry from DreamWorks that's closer to The Road to El Dorado than to Shrek, Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas tries too strenuously to contemporize ancient settings and characters for the sake of connecting with modern kids." Elvis Mitchell of The New York Times panned the film, suggesting the film featured a "boatload of celebrities slumming through another not-quite-thawed adventure story." Additionally, he claimed "more thought and care were lavished on the design of the monsters than on the hand-drawn lead characters, who have the same kind of sketchy features as the stars of those animated Bible story cartoons sold on late-night infomercials."There was additional criticism for the film's departure from its Arabic origin. Jack Shaheen, a critic of Hollywood's portrayal of Arabs, believed that "the studio feared financial and possibly political hardships if they made the film's hero Arab," and claimed that "if no attempt is made to challenge negative stereotypes about Arabs, the misperceptions continue. It's regrettable that the opportunity wasn't taken to change them, especially in the minds of young people." At one point, Shaheen asked Katzenberg to include some references to Arabic culture in the film. According to Shaheen, "he didn't seem surprised that I mentioned it, which presumably means that it was discussed early on in the development of the film."


=== Box office ===
On the film's opening weekend, the film earned $6.9 million and $10 million since its Wednesday start. It reached sixth place at the box office and faced early competition from Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines, Legally Blonde 2: Red, White & Blonde, Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle, Finding Nemo, and Hulk. The week after its release, the similarly themed film Pirates of the Caribbean: Curse of the Black Pearl premiered, in which Sinbad grossed $4.3 million finishing seventh. The film closed on October 9, 2003, after earning $26.5 million in the United States and Canada and $54.3 million overseas, for a worldwide total of $80.7 million.The box office run of Sinbad flopped causing a loss of $125 million for DreamWorks Animation. When speaking of the disappointment, Katzenberg commented, "I think the idea of a traditional story being told using traditional animation is likely a thing of the past."


== Soundtrack ==
All music is composed by Harry Gregson-Williams, except as noted.


== Video game ==
A video game based on the film developed by Small Rockets and published by Atari was released on October 21, 2003 for Microsoft Windows.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas at IMDb
Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas at The Big Cartoon DataBase
Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas at AllMovie
Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas at Box Office Mojo