Sorority Boys is a 2002 American comedy film directed by Wallace Wolodarsky, about a group of college boys who dress up as girls in order to prove their innocence for a crime they did not commit. The film starred Barry Watson, Michael Rosenbaum and Harland Williams.


== Plot ==
Three college friends, Dave, Adam, and Doofer – who are head of the Social Committee in a fraternity house called KOK (Kappa Omicron Kappa) – are living the party lifestyle. Spence, the socially-awkward KOK President, is punishing a group of new pledges for teaching the KOK handshake to a girl, when Adam and Dave interrupt his ceremony, because they need the space for further partying. The KOKs are known for throwing heavy parties and socially discriminating against the members of the all-girl sorority group DOG (Delta Omicron Gamma), who regularly protest the actions of the KOKs as rude and sexist. The next morning, Dave, Adam, and Doofer are accused by Spence of embezzling money from the treasury and are subsequently run out of the house.
Doofer suggests that they can find the real thief by reviewing tapes from Adam's room, which are made from the camera he has hidden in his closet to surreptitiously record his sexual conquests, as the safe is right next to his bed. In order to infiltrate the house, the three follow Doofer's plan of dressing up as women (however rather unattractive in appearance and clothing wise) to get inside because it's ladies night and also because they have been booted from the house. They are unsuccessful at getting the tape as they are mistaken as DOG members who are trying to infiltrate the party and are then thrown out of the house, dumped on the front steps of the DOG house.
Soon afterwards the boys now known as Adina, Roberta, and Daisy pledge the DOG sorority house and soon realize just how badly they and the KOK members have been treating the DOG members, soon growing attached to them and becoming close friends. They also become smarter and more understanding of what it means to be a woman as they learn about low self-esteem issues and learning how to act and look like a woman.
Adam, as Adina, arrives back at the KOK house and tries to seduce Jimmy, now living in Adam's room, to get the tape, but fails when they each consume a roofie-laced drink prepared by the other and pass out. Daisy (a.k.a. Dave) is supposed to back Adam up, but is falling in love with DOG president Leah and spends the night with her instead.
The DOG sisters later win a powder-puff football game against the Tri Pis, the reward being entry to the annual KOK-Tail Cruise, where they know the box of Adam's tapes will be onboard to serve as pornographic entertainment. They chase the Tri Pis off the boat and then cast them adrift on a life raft. Leah dances with Daisy, and confesses to wanting a relationship. Daisy, knowing the ruse will end soon when the group finds the tape, ends things with Leah by stating she is moving back to Minnesota. The two come to mutual understanding. After temporarily showing himself as Dave in order to interview with an alum, John Kloss, and secure jobs for himself, Adam, and Doofer, Leah walks in while Daisy and Adina are embracing in celebration, and mistakenly thinks that they are in a relationship, and the "Minnesota" excuse was fake. She storms out with Daisy following her.
John Kloss later grabs Leah on the rear and she slaps him across the face. He then calls for Leah to be thrown overboard. Daisy reveals her true identity as Dave to stop the men, while Roberta is also exposed as Doofer when he is caught with the tape, and Adina is exposed as Adam. The KOK "High Council" convenes to determine their fate, with Dave lamenting the way they have historically treated the DOGs and states he no longer wants to be a member of KOK. Next Dave accuses Spence of stealing the money, and Doofer produces the tape to prove it. At first the tape shows Adam having sex with the Tri-Pi but then the tape cuts to Spence stealing the money while saying to himself "I'll teach them to humiliate me". He is next thrown overboard.
Later, back at the KOK house, Adam is named president. Dave meets with Leah and starts their relationship over, truthfully this time, and Doofer is beginning a relationship with one of the DOG girls.
Sometime later, the life raft with all the Tri Pis is shown still floating in the ocean, far away from land.


== Cast ==


== Reception ==
The film was panned by critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has an approval rating of 12% based on 65 reviews, with an average score of 3.22/10. The website's consensus reads: "A sloppy fratboy movie, Sorority Boys offers up a parade of gross-out gags and sex jokes, while insulting and ogling women."The film barely made back its $12 million budget, grossing a worldwide total of $12,517,488.


== See also ==
Cross-dressing in film and television


== References ==


== External links ==
Sorority Boys at IMDb
Sorority Boys at Box Office Mojo
Sorority Boys at Rotten Tomatoes