Southlander is a 2001 American independent film by Steve Hanft and Ross Harris. Originally titled Recycler after the Los Angeles magazine of the same name, the film writers changed the name of the movie—to Southlander to avoid trademark issues.


== Plot ==
Down-and-out keyboardist Chance (Rory Cochrane) sees redemption in touring with dub-pop band Future Pigeon, fronted by the lovely Rocket (Beth Orton).  But to make the band, he needs a signature sound—which he finds in the futuristic '69 "Molotron" keyboard.  Chance's dreams are put on hold on the eve of the tour, when the Molotron is swiped from his car.  Southlander follows Chance and his friend Ross Angeles (Ross Harris) as they track down the stolen keyboard through the pages of the Southlander, a local rag that publishes classified ads for musical equipment.  The journey quickly turns into a surreal trip through LA's underground music scene.


== Cast ==
Rory Cochrane
Ross Harris
Lawrence Hilton Jacobs
Beth Orton
Beck
Hank Williams III
Jennifer Herrema
Gregg Henry
Richard Edson
Ione Skye
Mark Gonzales
Laura Prepon as Seven=FiveSinger/songwriter Elliott Smith plays the role of the bus driver in the film. He also wrote two exclusive songs for the film.


== Soundtrack ==
"Southlander Theme"
"Illumination Dub" – Beth Orton, Eddie Ruscha
"Dr. Fantasm" – Eddie Ruscha
"Making Out" – Eddie Ruscha
"Green Room" – Billy Higgins, J. Littleton, K. Gamble, Azar Lawrence, & Richard Grant
"Speedway Child" – Eddie Ruscha
"Taste It" – Eddie Ruscha, Ross Harris
"End of the Century" – Jennifer Herrema, Neil Hagerty
"Space Kat" – Eddie Ruscha
"Video City Boy" – C. Borrell, Ross Harris
"A Life Story" – Union 13
"Rust Drive" – Eddie Ruscha
"Elemental Blues" – Eddie Ruscha
"Motherchild Theme" – Eddie Ruscha
"Zu Zu Dubrider" – Eddie Ruscha
"Piano Drop" – Ross Harris
"Puttin' It Down" – Beck Hansen
"Seven Equals Five" – A. Spiegelman, B. Reynolds, Bill Dusha
"Spa" – C. Borrell, Ross Harris
"Lane's World" – Eddie Ruscha
"Solar Invocation" – Eddie Ruscha
"Gently Waves" – Takako Minekawa
"Broken Train" – Beck Hansen
"Confederate Dub" – Eddie Ruscha
"Alone and Dying" – Hank Williams III
"Sweetest Decline" – Beth Orton
"Fatter Cats Bigga Fish" – The Coup
"Snowbunny's Serenade" – Elliott Smith
"Motherchild Chase" – Eddie Ruscha
"Splitsville" – Elliott SmithNotes:

Ed Ruscha, Jr. is credited as Da Da Munchamonkey in the film.
"Sweetest Decline" is erroneously listed as "Central Reservation" in the DVD liner notes.
"Snowbunny's Serenade" is an alternate version of Elliott Smith's song "Bye" (from Figure 8), played on a different keyboard.


== External links ==
Southlander at IMDb