Southern Comfort is a 2001 documentary film about the final year in the life of Robert Eads, a transgender man. Eads, diagnosed with ovarian cancer, was turned down for treatment by a dozen doctors out of fear that treating such a patient would hurt their reputations. By the time Eads received treatment, the cancer was too advanced to save his life.


== Plot ==
The film begins in the spring and documents Eads' life through the following winter. Eads falls in love with Lola, a transgender woman. He spends those remaining warm days in the company of his "chosen family": Maxwell, Cas, and "the rest". That summer, his mother and father drive ten hours to visit Robert, who is still their daughter in their eyes. Later that year, Eads makes his last appearance at the Southern Comfort Conference in Atlanta, Georgia, a prominent transgender gathering. Already feeling ill, he addresses a crowd of 500 and takes Lola to what is for them a prom that never was. Shortly after the conference, Eads dies in a nursing home with his chosen family.
After Eads' death, his ashes were spread across the family farm around a lone Christmas tree which was to symbolize Robert's many changes and blossomings in life.
Eads' friends, Tom and Debbie King, also appear in the film. They saved Eads' life when he collapsed in a pool of his own blood while staying with them. They initially sought treatment for Eads but were unable to locate a doctor willing to treat a transgender man.
Eads' lifelong struggle to have his outer appearance match his inner self is a salient theme in the movie. All persons portrayed in the movie wrestle with themes of rejection from others, rejection of self, feeling ostracized from humanity and ultimately crafting their own lives and personal support systems.


== Stage adaptation ==
A stage musical, based on the film, was presented off-Broadway at the Public Theater. The musical was conceived by Robert DuSold and Thomas Caruso, with book and lyrics by Dan Collins and music by Julianne Wick Davis, and directed by Caruso. The musical ran from February 22 (previews) to March 27, 2016. Annette O'Toole was featured as Robert Eads, with Jeff McCarthy as "Lola Cola".The musical had a workshop production by the off-off-Broadway CAP 21 Theatre Company from October 6, 2011, to November 5, 2011.The musical then was produced at the Barrington Stage Company in Pittsfield, Massachusetts, in July 2013, as part of the BSC Musical Theatre Lab.Julianne Wick Davis and Dan Collins won the Jonathan Larson Grant in 2012.The stage adaption faced some criticism for its failure to cast more trans actors. All but two of the roles had been filled by cisgender actors.  However, Pride Films & Plays in Chicago announced a new production in 2019 featuring trans performers playing all five transgender characters.


== Awards ==
Grand Jury Prize (Documentary), Sundance Film Festival 2001
First Prize, Seattle International Film Festival
Special Audience Award, Berlin Film Festival


== See also ==
History of transgender people in the United States


== References ==


== External links ==
New Wave Films
Southern Comfort at IMDb
Interview with Kate Davis