Strange Wilderness is a 2008 American comedy-adventure film produced by Adam Sandler's production company, Happy Madison Productions for Paramount Pictures, and starring Steve Zahn, Allen Covert, Jonah Hill, Kevin Heffernan, Ashley Scott, Peter Dante, Harry Hamlin, Robert Patrick, Joe Don Baker, Justin Long, Jeff Garlin, and Ernest Borgnine. It tells the story about the crew members of the titular nature show heading to Ecuador to investigate a Bigfoot sighting in order to keep the show from being cancelled. The film received negative reviews and was a box office bomb, making less than $7 million against a $20 million budget.


== Plot ==
Peter Gaulke (Steve Zahn) is the host of an unsuccessful nature program called Strange Wilderness. When he and his sidekick/soundman Fred Wolf (Allen Covert) meet with the K-Pip network head Ed Lawson (Jeff Garlin), they learn that Strange Wilderness is threatened with cancellation due to the low ratings, inappropriate footage like lions having sex, a scene with garbage from Peter's vehicle coming out, and poor quality since the death of Peter's father who originally hosted the show.
While Peter works on ideas to keep Strange Wilderness on the air with Fred, equipment manager Lynn Cooker (Jonah Hill), RV driver Danny Gutierrez (Peter Dante), camera man Junior (Justin Long), and his father's old friend/original cameraman Milas (Ernest Borgnine), his father's old friend Bill Calhoun (Joe Don Baker) comes to him with photos of Bigfoot hiding in Ecuador and a map to his cave. Peter is excited. He also learns that his rival Sky Pierson (Harry Hamlin), the host of a more successful wildlife show, will pay Bill $1,000 for the map. Unable to pay the amount, Peter tells Bill that he will have the money and pay him in a week at his mountain cabin.
Peter, Fred, Lynn, Danny, and Junior start preparing for the long trip. They also bring in two new people: Whitaker (Kevin Heffernan), a former car mechanic now hired as the animal handler, and Cheryl (Ashley Scott), a travel agent.
While stopping to shoot footage of sea lions, Danny dresses up as a seal to get good angles but gets attacked by a shark and ends up hospitalized. Outside the hospital, Peter and Fred get into trouble with a local Hispanic gang, get their front teeth knocked out, and go to a local dentist. These incidents result in the group's funds being drained.
The group arrive at Bill's cabin and learn that he already sold the map to Pierson. However, Bill manages to make a copy of the map since Pierson studied the map under one of Bill's security cameras. He also enlists the help of renowned tracker Gus Hayden (Robert Patrick), but the group does not have the money to hire him. While urinating in the bushes, Peter is attacked unexpectedly by a mother turkey and ends up with his penis inside the bird's mouth. The group rushes him to a hospital to remove the turkey from his penis. The group stops the doctor from cutting the turkey's head off when a wildlife ranger and his son, who are the turkey's owners, say there is a $5,000 reward for the bird's return.
The group continues their journey and eventually reach Ecuador where they meet up with Dick (Blake Clark), an explorer and a friend of Bill, who takes them to Gus Hayden.
The next morning however, they wake up to find that Gus has left, stolen their equipment, and Cheryl has gone with him. Though hesitant and with Peter not willing to give up, Dick agrees to lead the group through the jungle. During the night, Cheryl catches up with the group where she explains that she saw Gus stealing their equipment and pretended to run off with him so she could convince him to give her the map.
The next day while crossing the river, Dick is attacked and eaten by piranhas. They also come across Pierson's camp and find that he and his team have been killed by local pygmies. The group then gathers the camp's equipment and eventually reach Bigfoot's cave. While filming, a confused Bigfoot (David Mattey) steps out and ends up getting gunned down when the group was scared at his presence. Not sure how to end the show in a good way, Cooker comes up with the idea of showing Bigfoot committing suicide.
The surviving members return to the studio to show Lawson their footage where he berates them for their ridiculousness and cancels Strange Wilderness. This leads to a fight within the group.
One year later, Peter gets a visit from Milas and encourages him to revive Strange Wilderness. Peter gets everyone back together and they make an episode about the shark attack using footage of them vomiting into the shark's mouth at the scene of the incident as well as Danny getting bitten in the arm by that shark. Peter and Fred show the episode to Lawson who decides to put Strange Wilderness back on the air since people love shark attacks and Pierson's death gives them no competition. This pleases Peter and Fred.
A postscript states that Strange Wilderness became successful again and dominated the 3:00 AM slot. Six months later, Peter's group went searching for the Loch Ness Monster where hilarity occurred in Scotland. They remained friends to this day.


== Cast ==
Steve Zahn as Peter Gaulke, the host of Strange Wilderness.
Allen Covert as Fred Wolf, the soundman for Strange Wilderness and Peter's sidekick.
Jonah Hill as Lynn Cooker, the equipment manager for Strange Wilderness.
Kevin Heffernan as Whitaker, a former car mechanic that becomes the animal handler for Strange Wilderness.
Ashley Scott as Cheryl, a travel agent that gets involved with Strange Wilderness.
Peter Dante as Danny Gutierrez, an RV driver.
Harry Hamlin as Sky Pierson, the host of a rival nature TV show.
Robert Patrick as Gus Hayden, an animal tracker.
Joe Don Baker as Bill Calhoun, an old friend of Peter's father.
Justin Long as Junior, a camera man for Strange Wilderness.
Jeff Garlin as Ed Lawson, the head of the TV studio K-Pip that broadcasts Strange Wilderness.
Ernest Borgnine as Milas, an old friend of Peter's dad and the original camera man on Strange Wilderness.
John Farley as a mountain doctor
Oliver Hudson as TJ, an animal handler.
Blake Clark as Dick, an explorer who is frinds with Gus.
Seth Rogen as the voice of a ranger in a helicopter
Kevin Alejandro as Hispanic Man #1
Jake Abel as conservationist
Jim Meskimen as Park Ranger Don, a park ranger who interrupts one of Peter's filming activities for Strange Wilderness because he didn't have a permit to film in the forest.
David Mattey as Bigfoot, a Cryptid that was sighted in Ecuador.
Jennifer Perks as Debra
Meg Wolf as Judy, a K-Pip receptionist.
Molly Wolf as Little Girl
Bill Burrud as Peter Gaulke's father (archive footage)


== Reception ==
The film received highly negative reviews. Rotten Tomatoes gave it a 2% approval rating, based on 48 reviews with an average rating of 2.7/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Strange Wilderness is a laugh-free comedy that's both aimless and overly crass." Only one review counted for the website was positive, who was Donald Clarke of The Irish Times. On Metacritic, it has a weighted average score of 12 out 100 based on 12 reviews, indicating "overwhelming dislike". It is in 42nd place on the Metacritic list of the worst-reviewed films ever (with seven or more reviews).Donald Clarke of The Irish Times wrote: "Call me a moron, but I laughed so hard I inhaled my roach. The film just might be the funniest work yet produced by Happy Madison, Adam Sandler's production company, and not just because the boss is nowhere to be seen."


== References ==


== External links ==
Strange Wilderness at IMDb
Strange Wilderness at Rotten Tomatoes
Strange Wilderness at Metacritic
Strange Wilderness at Box Office Mojo
Strange Wilderness at AllMovie