Super Why! (stylized as Super WHY!) is an American-Canadian children's computer animated educational show created by Angela C. Santomero. The series was produced by New York City-based Out of the Blue Enterprises and Toronto-based DHX Media (originally through its Decode Entertainment division for seasons 1 and 2). The show debuted on September 3, 2007 on most PBS member stations and ended on May 12, 2016.


== Plot ==
The show is set in Storybrook Village, where the title character, Whyatt Beanstalk, lives with his friends Pig, Red, and Princess Pea. In each of the episodes, one of the main characters has a "super big problem" a "super big question" and a "super big mystery" The main characters then discuss their problem at the Book Club, then agreeing to look in a book to solve the problem.
The goal of the Super Readers is to follow the storyline of the book to solve the problem. As they progress through the events of the story, they encounter obstacles, which can be solved by applying their literacy skills to change the story. As they overcome these obstacles, they are rewarded with red glittery "Super Letters" that form the solution to the "super big problem." and the "super big question."
At the conclusion of the adventure, the Super Readers fly back to the Book Club. The Super Letters are put onto the giant computer screen and are spelled out to show the "Super Story Answer." Then one of the Super Readers gives the reason why that particular word or phrase serves as the solution to the Super Big Problem.


== Episodes ==


== Characters ==
Whyatt Beanstalk / Super Why (voiced by: Nicholas Castel Vanderburgh (season 1), Nicholas Kaegi (season 2), Johnny Orlando (season 3) - The host of the series and the leader of the group of characters who become the "Super Readers", Whyatt is an olive-skinned, blue-eyed, brunet boy who wears a dark blue polo shirt with green stripe patterns and khaki pants. In the episode "Jack and the Beanstalk", it is revealed that Whyatt's older brother is Jack, the hero of the English folktale Jack and the Beanstalk. Whyatt lives with his mother Mrs. Beanstalk, who writes stories, and his father Mr. Beanstalk who illustrates them, along with his baby sister, Joy. Jack appears in some episodes but generally "away at college." When Whyatt arrives at the book club, he introduces himself. He says, "Whyatt here!". His super reader form is Super Why. In this form, he has a green mask, turbo sneakers, a blue cape, gold belt, green jumpsuit (leotard), and blue briefs. His symbols are a blue book and a question mark and his signature colors are green, and blue. He has "the power to read", which focuses on vocabulary. In episodes where he is the focus of the problem in Storybrook Village, Red asks him what his problem is. Otherwise, he asks one of the other members.
Littlest Pig / Alpha Pig (voiced by: Zachary Bloch in (seasons 1 & 2), Samuel Faraci in (season 3)) – He is referred to in the credits as "The Littlest Pig," he introduces himself at the book club as "P is for Pig!" but throughout the show, he is simply known as "Pig".  Pig enjoys pretending and dressing up like his father, a construction pig. He is pink and generally wears a construction hat, with a toolkit belt and safety goggles.  His super reader form is Alpha Pig. In this form, he wears a blue-violet short sleeve shirt with orange accents, an orange belt with a triangle on the center, an orange construction hat with a purple triangle on the center, safety goggles, yellow cape and orange sneakers with yellow and brown accents. His Alphabet Toolbox has various equipment in it. His symbol is a triangle and his signature colors are purple and orange. His "alphabet power" focuses on the alphabet.
Little Red Riding Hood / Wonder Red (voiced by: Siera Florindo in (seasons 1–2), T.J. McGibbon in (season 3) – She is referred to as "Red" in the TV series. The title character from the fairy tale, she only refers to herself as "Red Riding Hood" and is a freckle-faced pale skinned brunette/redhead who wears a red hoodie and skirt and red roller skates as well as a red flat cap. When she is introduced, she says "Red Riding Hood rolling in!" When turned into her super reader form , her attire becomes a purple bodysuit with red trim. Her skates are turned purple and her main item is the Wonder Words Basket and her symbol is a spiral and her signature colors are red and purple. She has "word power", which focuses on rhyming and word families like "OP", "AT", "UN", "UMP", "OG", etc. In the episode "Judith's Happy Chanukah", it is revealed that Red is Jewish, as she invites Whyatt over to her Grandma's house for Hanukkah.
Princess Pea / Princess Presto (voiced by: Tajja Isen) – Princess Pea was named after the children's story "The Princess and the Pea"; it is shown in the episode The Princess and The Pea that the princess in that story was Pea's mother and the prince in that story was her father. However, in this case, "Pea" is her surname. She is dark skinned with large green eyes and curly black hair, wears a lavender princess dress and loves to dance. When she enters, she says, "Princess Pea at your service!" Her super reader form is Princess Presto and in this form, she pulls her long hair into a bun, and she wears a pink dress with lime green accents with a purple star in the middle, pink crown with jewels, pink gloves with green accents, pink sparkly transparent cape, and pink shoes. Her symbol is a star because she always takes her Magic Spelling Wand with her and her signature colors are pink and green. She has "spelling power", which focuses on spelling.
Woofster (voiced by: Joanne Vannicola) – Woofster is a puppy dog with light brown spots. He also lives with Whyatt and his family. When he turns into Woofster, he has dictionary power and can find the meaning to any word. His Super Reader form has a blue cape and a collar with a small red dictionary, and allows him the power to speak also and his symbol is a dog bone and his signature colors are blue and red. He is also declared the fifth Super Reader. He officially became a Super Reader in the episode "Woofster Finds a Home". He cuts the "Super You" part after the transformation of Whyatt Beanstalk to Super Why for Season 2.`


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website