Synchronic is a 2019 American science fiction thriller film written and directed by Justin Benson, and produced by Justin Benson and Aaron Moorhead. It stars Anthony Mackie and Jamie Dornan.
It had its world premiere at the 2019 Toronto International Film Festival. It was released on October 23, 2020, by Well GO USA Entertainment. It was released on Netflix in some countries on April 16, 2021.


== Summary ==
Steve, a ladies' man, and Dennis a married father, work together as paramedics. They are called out to a series of cases where people are either dead in strange circumstances or whose stories are incoherent. The cases are linked to a new designer drug called Synchronic.
At a domestic abuse call, they find a stabbing victim and an old sword embedded in the wall.  While Steve tends to an injured man, he is accidentally stuck by a dirty needle.  Being tested for possible infections leads to the discovery of cancer in his underdeveloped and non-calcified pineal gland. The second call, a burn victim, is a completely burned body. The third call is a bite from a venomous snake no longer found in the area.
On a call to a drug party, they find a dead boy, and a girl says there was a third girl, Brianna, Dennis's teenage daughter. The next morning. Steve goes to a local smoke shop and buys all the Synchronic, which he learns is discontinued.  As he leaves, Steve declines a man's offer pay triple its worth. The next morning, catches the man breaking into his house.  He says he is the chemist who created Synchronic, which alters the pineal gland's perception of time. Children, who have a non-calcified pineal gland, pass through time.  Adults seem to only partially move through time like ghosts. 
During their next call, a victim of a sword fight dies.  Steve, who is a fan of the history of science, quotes Einstein on the meaninglessness of time when faced with his friend's death.  Under the stress of Brianna's disappearance, Dennis's marriage deteriorates.  When he learns someone has been stealing morphine, he misinterprets Steve's poor health and use of painkillers as evidence he is a morphine addict.  The two come to blows while treating a crazed patient.
At home, Steve takes Synchronic, travels back to when the area was covered in a swamp, and is attacked by a conquistador. Steve records his observations, stating Synchronic allows traveling backwards though time for seven minutes in the same geographical location.  When he travels back to the ice age, he determines his location when taking the pill determines the destination year.
During his next attempt, he takes back his dog, Hawking.  When he moves from the original location due to a hostile man, he loses Hawking and is unable to bring him back. At the location where Brianna disappeared, he discovers several tribal men, who chase him up a tree. He discovers that Brianna may have wandered off before taking Synchronic, and objects from the present can anchor him to the present.
Steve and Dennis talk at a bar.  Dennis, who has taken his life for granted, believes he is headed to a divorce.  Steve tells Dennis about his cancer, and the two reconcile. Their driver, Tom, was stealing the morphine. At the graveyard of Steve's family, Steve shows Dennis the videos of his time travel, and they deduce that Brianna may have left a message for them to find in the park. Steve travels back to a battlefield during the Battle of New Orleans, is shot in the leg, and searches for Brianna.  He finds her in a trench and gives her his last Synchronic pill.  They quickly move to the boulder Steve traveled to, where a looter intercepts them and holds Steve at gunpoint, thinking he is a slave. Brianna returns to her future, while Steve is stranded in the past.  He appears to become a ghost in front of Dennis. They shake hands and the film ends without knowing if Steve returns to the present.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
In September 2018, it was announced Jamie Dornan and Anthony Mackie had joined the cast of the film, with Justin Benson and Aaron Moorhead directing.


== Release ==
The film had its world premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 7, 2019. Shortly after, Well Go USA Entertainment acquired distribution rights to the film, announcing a 2020 release. It was released in theaters on October 23, 2020.Synchronic was released on digital and video on demand in the United States on January 12, 2021. The movie has been released on Netflix in the US on April 16, 2021. 


== Reception ==
Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 79% based on 149 reviews, with an average rating of 6.8/10. The site's critics consensus reads: "Synchronic sets off on an intriguingly idiosyncratic journey that should satisfy fans of Aaron Moorhead and Justin Benson's earlier work." Metacritic reports a weighted average score of 64 out of 100, based on 23 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Synchronic at IMDb
Synchronic at Rotten Tomatoes
Synchronic at Metacritic