Table 19 is a 2017 American comedy film written and directed by Jeffrey Blitz, from a story originally written by brothers Jay and Mark Duplass. The film stars Anna Kendrick, Craig Robinson, June Squibb, Lisa Kudrow, Stephen Merchant, Wyatt Russell, and Tony Revolori.
The film was released on March 3, 2017, by Fox Searchlight Pictures, receiving generally negative reviews from critics and grossed $5 million.


== Plot ==
Eloise McGarry attends her oldest friend Francie Millner's wedding. Originally maid of honor, she "dropped out" two months ago after her (now) ex-boyfriend Teddy, the bride's brother and the best man, broke up with her by text after two years together. Teddy is back with his old girlfriend Nikki, who replaced Eloise as maid of honor. At the reception, Eloise discovers she is seated at Table 19. Considering leaving, she meets a man named Huck who notices her looking distressed and offers unwanted advice .
Eloise stays, meeting her table mates: Jerry and Bina Kepp, Facebook friends of the groom's father; teen Renzo Eckberg, his mom is an acquaintance of the groom and hopes to meet a girl; Jo Flanagan, Francie's childhood nanny; and Walter Thimble, the bride's cousin, on parole. They discuss if Table 19 is a "good table," and Eloise tells them, as she'd helped  plan the wedding she knows Table 19 is for misfits. 
As the newlyweds arrive and begin dancing, Eloise starts feeling insecure and dances with Huck, who she kisses. When he won't sit with her, she realizes he is a wedding crasher and "Huck" isn't his real name.
Although not bonding initially, they come together when Jo realizes Eloise is pregnant. Confronting Teddy about dumping her when she told him about the baby, he said did it because she said they would be ridiculous parents, and he didn't want to disappoint her. Bitter and feeling unappreciated, the Table 19 crew move to Jo's room to smoke pot and talk. Walter went to prison for stealing $125,000 from the father of the bride, because a former friend conned him. Renzo came to the wedding in lieu of his junior prom, as his mom thought he could meet someone. Jo feels the children she cared for have completely forgotten her. 
On a walk, Jerry gives Renzo advice on how to pick up girls, while Eloise realizes Jo has cancer. (Jo has until about the same time Eloise will give birth.) Eloise says she thinks she's having a girl so Jo tells her not to name her "Jo" as it's a tough name for a girl. Bina and Jerry fight, and she admits she came to the wedding to have an affair with an ex, who did not show. They argue, and she heads back inside with Walter.
On Jo's suggestion, the six try to find the wedding crasher Eloise met earlier, with the aid of the photographer and the hotel reception staff. They learn "Huck" is actually the groom from another wedding. As payback, Walter steals Huck's wedding cake to replace the one they destroyed earlier.
Returning to the reception, Table 19 is visited by the bride and groom, who express genuine happiness that everyone there has attended. Francie and Eloise talk briefly, and Francie apologizes that she was seated so far away from her, and Eloise decides to leave early. Francie then assures Jo she has not forgotten her, telling a brief but touching childhood story about Teddy, inspiring the table to see him differently. They track down Eloise, encouraging her to tell him how she really feels. As the core wedding party leaves on a ferry, she apologizes to him from the dock shouting, but he can't hear.
Eloise, Walter, Jo, and Renzo return to the wedding hall for the last of the cake. In their room, the Kepps discuss their fragile marriage and reconcile before joining them. The mood significantly changes when Teddy suddenly reappears, dripping wet from jumping off the ferry and swimming to shore, and asks Eloise to repeat what she yelled. Eloise asks that they both continue to be willing to forgive each other and they reconcile. Renzo asks the band to play them another song to which everybody dances, including Teddy.
A few months later, Jo has died of cancer and the Kepps are now happy, taking care of her dog. Renzo has a girlfriend, and Walter refers to the other Table 19 guests as family. Eloise and Teddy are together and have a baby. They mail the birth announcements to their friends and family, including all the guests from Table 19. The card reveals they named the baby boy Joe.


== Cast ==
Anna Kendrick as Eloise McGarry
Craig Robinson as Jerry Kepp
June Squibb as Jo Flanagan
Lisa Kudrow as Bina Kepp
Stephen Merchant as Walter Thimble
Tony Revolori as Renzo Eckberg
Wyatt Russell as Teddy
Amanda Crew as Nikki
Thomas Cocquerel as Huck
Becky Ann Baker as Carol Millner
Andy Daly as Luke Pfaffler
Maria Thayer as Infamous Kate Millner
Andy Blitz as Notorious Donny Haczyk
Rya Meyers as Francie Millner
Margo Martindale as Freda Eckberg


== Production ==
In April 2009, Fox Searchlight Pictures acquired the film, with Jay Duplass and Mark Duplass set to direct their own screenplay. In October 2011, Jeffrey Blitz was brought in to rewrite the script and direct the film. On March 24, 2015, it was announced that Anna Kendrick, Craig Robinson, Lisa Kudrow, Stephen Merchant, Tony Revolori, June Squibb, Wyatt Russell, and Amanda Crew would star in the film.Principal photography began in the Atlanta area on March 27, 2015, and ended on April 30, 2015. While the plot places the wedding at a resort on an island in the fictional "Lake Alma", in Michigan, filming took place on the Lake Lanier Islands, northeast of Atlanta and at The Ritz-Carlton Reynolds on Lake Oconee, southeast of Atlanta.  Other scenes were filmed in Douglasvillewest of Atlanta. Foxhall Resort is one of the production sites of the movie. It was filmed in a venue called "Legacy".


== Music ==
In February 2016, it was announced that John Swihart would score the film.


== Release ==
The film was originally scheduled to be released on January 20, 2017, before being pushed back to March 3.


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 26% based on 113 reviews, with an average rating of 4.55/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Table 19 is marginally more entertaining than actually sitting with a table full of strangers at a wedding — although most screenings won't come with an open bar, which makes it a wash." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 40 out of 100, based on reviews from 29 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".David Fear of Rolling Stone magazine called the film “[a] tonally uneven mishmash of Wes Anderson quirk, John Cassavetes guts-spilling and The Breakfast Club, all of which somehow manages to dampen the talents of its crack ensemble cast."Owen Gleiberman of Variety magazine wrote that “[a]lmost everything that happens in this movie rings cloyingly false. It wants to make you laugh and cry, but you may be too busy cringing."


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Table 19 at IMDb