The Way Back (titled Finding the Way Back in the United Kingdom) is a 2020 American sports drama film directed by Gavin O'Connor and written by Brad Ingelsby. It stars Ben Affleck, Al Madrigal, Michaela Watkins, and Janina Gavankar, and follows an alcoholic construction worker who is recruited to become head coach of the basketball team at the high school he used to attend.
The film was theatrically released in the United States on March 6, 2020, by Warner Bros. Pictures. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic causing movie theaters across the globe to close, Warner Bros. made the film available to own digitally on March 24, 2020. The film received generally positive reviews from critics, with Affleck's performance receiving praise. However, the film suffered at the box office due to COVID-19 as it was only in theaters for two weeks.


== Plot ==
Jack Cunningham is an alcoholic ironworker who is separated from his wife, Angela. While at Thanksgiving dinner with his mother, his sister Beth, and her family, Beth reveals that friends, including Angela, have expressed concern about his drinking and isolation from friends and family. The next day, Jack receives a call from Father Devine at his Catholic high school, Bishop Hayes; where he was a star basketball player and led the team to multiple championships. Father Devine asks him to step in as the school's basketball coach, as the current coach has suffered a heart attack. Jack is initially reluctant, but accepts the job. Jack is introduced to assistant coach and algebra teacher Dan, as well as members of the team. Bishop Hayes has won only one game, and has not gone to the playoffs since Jack was a student. As a result, student interest in basketball has dropped greatly, leaving the team with just six varsity players. Among these players are Brandon, the team's introverted point guard and most talented player, and Marcus, the team's center, who aggravates his teammates and Jack with his attitude.
Angela meets with Jack and reveals that she is seeing someone new. Jack continues drinking heavily; his friend Doc takes him home from the bar every night, making sure he arrives safely.
The team faces Memorial, a larger school with a much more talented team, in one of Jack's first games as coach. Trailing significantly and frustrated at a perceived lack of effort, Jack benches Marcus and demands the team play with more toughness. Nevertheless, Bishop Hayes loses badly. Dan begins to notice signs of Jack's alcoholism, including an allusion to his drinking habits by Memorial's coach and finding beer cans in Jack's office.
After a game one night, Jack drives by Brandon walking alone and gives him a ride home. Brandon reveals that his mother is dead and his father cares for his younger brothers, leaving him unable to attend his games. Jack begins to institute strategic changes to the team, adopting a full-court press defense and a focus on conditioning to make up for the team's relative lack of size and talent.
The team is initially annoyed by the stricter practices and Jack's aggressive attitude, but soon grow to respect him. When Marcus arrives late for the next game, Jack kicks him off of the team. Jack's changes result in a close game, and he draws up a play that allows Brandon to pass to a teammate for the game-winning shot. Jack encourages him to take the shot himself as the team's best player, and to develop his leadership skills. He pushes Brandon to be more vocal on the court, eventually naming him team captain. Marcus comes to Jack's house unannounced to ask to be allowed back on the team, and Jack eventually relents.
The team continues to succeed, and Jack develops a bond with his players. His drinking decreases, and he begins to spend more time with his family and friends. Jack and Angela attend a birthday party for David, the son of Jack and Angela's friend Miguel. It is revealed that Jack and Angela had a son, Michael, who died from cancer. David and Michael were in the hospital together; David is now in remission.
With Bishop Hayes needing just one win to make the playoffs, they give up a 4th quarter lead to an inferior team. While protesting a call, Jack is ejected; Bishop Hayes loses the game. On a drive home, Jack reveals to Brandon that his father was neglectful, only paying attention to Jack when his basketball talent was discovered. As a result, Jack turned down a full athletic scholarship to the perennial powerhouse basketball program at the University of Kansas, and has not touched a basketball since.
Their final game of the season is a rematch with Memorial. Jack visits Brandon's father Russ at his work, informing him that Brandon has received attention from college recruiters. Russ, who was a college basketball player himself, has discouraged his son from using basketball as a ticket to a better life.
At the game, Memorial jumps out to an early lead, but Bishop Hayes gradually mounts a comeback. On the final play, Jack draws up a play for Brandon to pass out for an open shot, but reconsiders, telling Brandon to take the shot himself. Brandon makes the shot, winning the game for Bishop Hayes. Later, Jack receives a call from Angela, telling him David is in the hospital. While visiting, Jack and Angela overhear a doctor informing David's parents his cancer has returned. The sight of their grief disturbs Jack, who leaves the hospital and returns to his regular bar, where he begins drinking again.
The following morning, Jack arrives to practice late and still drunk, falsely blaming his absence on a power outage. Dan informs Father Devine, who fires Jack, telling him he is unable to trust him around the team and fears he has a serious problem. Jack resumes drinking heavily. One night, while driving drunk with a woman he meets at the bar, Jack rear-ends a boat hitched to a parked car. The woman flees, telling him to enter her house through the back. Jack accidentally enters the wrong house, where he is confronted by its occupants. Jack attempts to leave before the police arrive, but the confrontation becomes physical. He is pushed down the front steps of the house and is knocked unconscious in the street.
Jack awakens in the hospital where he is met by his sister, Beth, who now demands he get help for his alcoholism. Jack begins to attend therapy, and starts to open up about his son's death. He meets with his wife and apologizes for his past mistakes. The Bishop Hayes team dedicates their first playoff game to Jack; Brandon sees that his father and brothers are in attendance. Meanwhile, at an outdoor court, Jack picks up a basketball, beginning to shoot.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
On June 11, 2018, it was announced that director Gavin O'Connor and actor Ben Affleck were going to re-team on a Warner Bros. drama film, titled The Has-Been, scripted by Brad Ingelsby about a former basketball star who has lost his wife and family foundation because of an addiction, and he attempts to regain his soul by becoming the coach of a high school basketball team at his alma mater. On September 26, 2018, it was reported that comedian Al Madrigal had joined the cast of the film, now known as Torrance, to play Dan, a well mannered high school mathematics teacher and the school's assistant coach who believes in Affleck's character after the head coach quits. Producers would be Jennifer Todd, Gordon Gray, Ravi Mehta, and O'Connor. In October 2018, Janina Gavankar joined the cast of the film. In November 2018, Brandon Wilson and Rachael Carpani joined the cast of the film. In July 2019, it was announced the title of the film was The Way Back. In August 2019, it was announced Rob Simonsen would score the film. Affleck spoke on how the film acted as a form of therapy for him following his own stints with alcoholism and rehab.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography began in October 2018 around the San Pedro neighborhood of Los Angeles.


== Release ==
The film was originally scheduled to be released on October 18, 2019. However, in March 2019, it was pushed back several months to March 6, 2020.On March 19, Warner Bros. Pictures announced that the film would be available digitally in the United States and Canada through Premium VOD on March 24 due to movie theaters closures because of the COVID-19 pandemic restrictions. This was just two weeks after the film's theatrical debut and before the end of the usual 90-day theatrical run. Another film distributed by the studio, Birds of Prey and the Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn, was also released earlier than expected for the same reason. The film was released on Blu-ray, and DVD on May 19, 2020.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
The Way Back grossed $13.6 million in the United States and Canada, and $1.1 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $14.7 million, against a production budget of $21–25 million.In the United States and Canada, the film was released alongside Onward and the wide expansion of Emma, and was projected to gross $7–10 million from 2,718 theaters in its opening weekend. It made $2.6 million on its first day. The film went on to debut to $8.5 million, finishing third at the box office. The film fell 70% in its second weekend to $2.4 million, finishing seventh, largely caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States.


=== Critical response ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 83% based on 212 reviews, with an average rating of 6.80/10. The website's critics consensus reads: "The Way Back's occasionally frustrating treatment of a formulaic story is often outweighed by Ben Affleck's outstanding work in the central role." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 66 out of 100, based on 40 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews." Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale, and PostTrak reported it received an average 3.5 out of 5 stars from viewers they polled, with 54% saying they would definitely recommend it.Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter wrote: "Affleck gives the impression of intimate familiarity with the anguish and self-disgust that dominate Jack's life; this character and project clearly meant something important to him, as the title bluntly suggests, and he gives it his all without overdoing the melodrama." Owen Gleiberman of Variety said that "Ben Affleck is compelling in a drama of addiction and redemption that plays off his own tabloid odyssey. But the tabloid version was better."


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
The Way Back at IMDb 
The Way Back at AllMovie