The Hitcher is a 2007 American road thriller film starring Sean Bean, Sophia Bush and Zachary Knighton. It is a remake of the 1986 film of the same name starring Rutger Hauer, Jennifer Jason Leigh, and C. Thomas Howell. The Hitcher was directed by Dave Meyers and produced by Michael Bay’s production company Platinum Dunes.
The film was released on January 19, 2007 in the United States and on June 1, 2007 in the UK.


== Plot ==
College students Jim (Zachary Knighton) and Grace (Sophia Bush) are driving across New Mexico to meet her friends for spring break. One night, they almost hit a hitchhiker (Sean Bean) who is standing in the middle of the road; Jim swerves and the car spins out of control to a stop. As the man approaches, Grace insists that someone else will stop to help him, and they take off.
Later that night at a gas station, Jim meets the hitchhiker who introduces himself as John Ryder and he asks for a ride. Reluctantly, Jim agrees. While on the road, he becomes violent and attacks them, holding a knife to Grace's eye. He tells Jim the only way to save them both is to say "I want to die". Jim hits the brakes, causing John to hit his head on the windshield, and then Jim kicks him out of the car. Grace tells Jim she wants to go home but he persuades her to continue with their trip.
The following day, they spot John in a family's car. Jim and Grace try to warn the family but crash their car. They are forced to continue on foot and eventually find the family's car on the side of the road; both the children and mother are already dead, with the father badly wounded. They take the car and stop at a nearby cafe for them, but the man dies. 
Suspected of having committed the murders, Jim and Grace are arrested and brought to the police station. John arrives shortly after and kills everyone at the station, while Jim and Grace flee. Lieutenant Esteridge pursues the couple, but John shows up and helps Jim and Grace escape the police, single-handedly taking out all of the police cruisers and a helicopter.
Grace and Jim check in at a motel. Grace falls asleep but is later woken by John, who tries to rape her. She manages to fight him off and hides in the bathroom. John suddenly disappears so Grace leaves the motel to look for Jim, and finds him chained at the wrists and ankles between a truck and a trailer. Grace approaches the truck, which is being revved up by John, and demands that he stops. The police arrive and tell her to drop her gun, as John drives forward and splits Jim in half, killing him. John is apprehended by the police.
The next morning, Esteridge tells Grace that the real John Ryder is missing and they do not know the true identity of the hitchhiker. He informs her the hitchhiker will be transported across the state to another prison. During the journey, the hitchhiker breaks free from his restraints and kills everyone in the van, causing the vehicle to crash, with Esteridge and Grace crashing close behind them. The hitchhiker shoots a pool of gasoline, igniting it, as Grace manages to escape from the car. Meanwhile, the hitchhiker shoots and kills Esteridge who is trapped in the car. Grace shoots the hitchhiker in the back and then in the chest. The hitchhiker asks her, "Feels good, doesn't it?" to which she replies "I don't feel a thing" before she shoots him in the head.


== Cast ==
Sean Bean as John Ryder / The Hitchhiker
Sophia Bush as Grace Andrews
Zachary Knighton as Jim Halsey
Neal McDonough as Lieutenant Esteridge
Kyle Davis as Buford's Store Clerk
Skip O'Brien as Harlan Bremmer Sr., Sheriff of Torrance County
Travis Schuldt as Deputy Harlan Bremmer Jr.
Danny Bolero as Officer Edwards
Lauren Cohn as Marlene
Yara Martinez as Beth
Jeffrey Hutchinson as Young Father


== Production ==


=== Development ===
Platinum Dunes announced on April 18, 2005 a remake of The Hitcher which starred Rutger Hauer, Jennifer Jason Leigh and C. Thomas Howell. Producer Michael Bay stated "I loved it as a kid, and we can add some cool twists and turn it into a rocking film". Bay also suggested that the protagonist in the remake would be female. On June 20, 2005 it was announced that Dave Meyers would direct the remake.


== Release ==


=== Box office ===
The film debuted at number 4 at the US the box office with $7,818,239 made in the opening week. After three weeks, the film placed number 11 at the box office and subsequently made $16,366,370. Five weeks after its nationwide release, The Hitcher had been pulled from most screens and was completely removed from cinemas after nine weeks. The Hitcher began its international release on March 1, 2007. As of June 30, 2009, the film has had a lifetime gross of $25.4 million.


=== Critical reception ===
As of June 2020, the film holds a 19% approval rating on the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, based on 108 reviews with an average rating of 3.84/10. The website's critics consensus reads: "Sean Bean tries giving motive and emotion to The Hitcher, but director Dave Meyers is more interested in cheap shocks, and gratuitous gore and torture." On Metacritic, the film has a rating of 28/100, based on 16 reviews, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Empire Magazine gave the film two stars and said that the picture was totally inferior to the original. The Guardian said "Don't even slow down for this one, certainly don't tag along for the ride."


== Awards and nominations ==
Sophia Bush: 2007 Teen Choice Awards: Choice Movie Actress: Horror/Thriller (Won)
Sophia Bush: 2007 Teen Choice Awards: Choice Movie: Breakout Female (Won)
Sophia Bush: 2007 Vail Film Festival: Rising Star Award (Won)
Crew: 2008 World Stunt Awards: Best Work In A Vehicle (Nominated)


== Home media ==
The DVD was released on May 1, 2007, featuring the theatrical R-rated cut in 2.40:1 anamorphic widescreen, along with English and French Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround tracks.  The Hitcher became available on Blu-ray in Australia on December 10, 2008.  The Hitcher was also released on the HD DVD format.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
The Hitcher at IMDb
The Hitcher at Box Office Mojo
The Hitcher at Rotten Tomatoes
The Hitcher at Metacritic