The Guru is a 2002 sex comedy film written by Tracey Jackson and directed by Daisy von Scherler Mayer. The film centers on a dance teacher who comes to the United States from India to pursue a normal career but incidentally stumbles into a brief but high-profile career as a sex guru, a career based on a philosophy he learns from a pornographic actress.
The film stars Jimi Mistry as the eponymous character, Heather Graham as the actress he learns from, and Marisa Tomei, who helps him reach his guru status among her socialite New York City friends.


== Plot ==
Ramu Gupta (Jimi Mistry), a dance teacher, leaves his native city Delhi, India, to seek his fortune in the United States. He is lured by the exaggerations of his cousin, Vijay, who has already moved to New York City. Vijay's deception is the first of several that drive the plot.
Seeking work as an actor, the naïve Ramu unknowingly lands a role in a pornographic film. That evening he accompanies Vijay and his roommates on a catering job at a society birthday party. When the Indian swami hired to address the party falls into drunken oblivion, Ramu takes his place. Lacking a real philosophy, he improvises by repeating advice he had been given by Sharonna (Heather Graham), an adult film actress he met earlier. Lexi (Marisa Tomei), the birthday girl, is so impressed that she promotes him as a New Age sex guru to her friends.
Ramu hires Sharonna, ostensibly for advice on how to be an actor in adult films, though what he really wants is more ideas he could use in his new role as the guru of sex. A personal relationship develops between the two, though Sharonna is engaged to a firefighter who thinks she's a school teacher. Complications ensue from these and other deceptions.


== Cast ==
Jimi Mistry as Ramu Gupta
Heather Graham as Sharonna
Marisa Tomei as Alexandra "Lexi" Hamilton
Dash Mihok as Rusty McGee, Sharonna's fiancé
Michael McKean as Dwain, a director of adult films
Christine Baranski as Chantal Hamilton, Lexi's mother
Ronald Guttman as Edwin Hamilton, Lexi's father
Thomas McCarthy as Lars Hamilton, Lexi's brother
Emil Marwa as Vijay Rao, Ramu's cousin
Ajay Naidu as Sanjiv, Vijay's roommate
Charles Singh as Amit, Vijay's roommate
Bobby Cannavale as Randy, Rusty's gay lover
Malachy McCourt as Father Flannigan
Sanjeev Bhaskar as Chef
Anita Gillette as Mrs. McGee, Rusty's mother
Pat McNamara as Mr. McGee, Rusty's father
Sinia Jane as Mrs. Gupta, Rumu's mother
Anoop Puri as Mr. Gupta, Rumu's father
Rizwan Manji as Party Waiter
Damian Young as Hank, the camera man
Dwight Ewell as Peaches, Sharonna's friend
Alex Khan as Young Ramu Gupta
Sakina Jaffery as a young woman in Dance class


== Production ==
The Guru was filmed in two months, mostly on location in New York City, though a few scenes were filmed in Delhi.Locations in New York City included Times Square, Manhattan's Chinatown, Central Park, Hunts Point, Queens, Brooklyn, the George Washington Bridge, and the World Trade Center.  Ramu's Broadway debut was filmed at Reverend Ike's United Palace Theater, while the setting for the finale was Bethlehem Lutheran Church in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.


== Music ==
The film features several Bollywood-style song-and-dance numbers, including one where Ramu and Sharonna  sing a version of Kya Mil Gaya from Sasural that morphs into a version of "You're the One That I Want" from Grease. The song "Every Kinda People" by Jo O'Meara of S Club 7 fame is used in the film's end credits, and also included is "One Way Or Another" by Sophie Ellis-Bextor, "Don't Say Goodbye" from Paulina Rubio's Border Girl album. "Round Round" by Sugababes also features.


== Reception ==
On the movie review aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes, The Guru has a 58% rating, with 50 of 86 reviewers giving the film a "fresh" rating.  Based on 30 reviews, the film's Metacritic score was 47 ("mixed").After viewing it at the Edinburgh International Film Festival, Derek Elley, reviewing it for Variety, called it a "generally entertaining but rather old-fashioned sex comedy" whose "basic plot of a naive Indian stumbling through white U.S. society...shows little advance in attitudes and humor on Blake Edwards' 1968 comedy The Party."  A BBC review said it "stirs together Bollywood and Hollywood, satire and romance, to create an appealing masala dish of a movie."After its U.S. premiere, Stephen Holden of The New York Times called it a "nervy conceptual hybrid" that "lurch[es] between a loudmouthed sitcom and a crude social satire" and noted that "behind its Hollywood-meets-Bollywood banner, The Guru... is a grindingly conventional comedy that insists on tying up its subplots in pretty ribbons and bows."


== References ==


== External links ==
The Guru at IMDb
The Guru at Box Office Mojo
The Guru at Rotten Tomatoes
The Guru at Metacritic