The Good Guy is a 2009 romantic comedy film directed by Julio DePietro starring Alexis Bledel, Scott Porter, and Bryan Greenberg. The story is a loose adaptation of Ford Madox Ford's 1915 novel The Good Soldier, which is referenced several times in the film's plot.


== Plot ==
Tommy Fielding is young, clever, charming, and attractive. He has got a smart, pretty girlfriend, Beth, a young Manhattanite and urban conservationist. He's also very good at his investment broker job, impressing his ruthless, cynical boss, Cash. When a key member of Tommy's sales team suddenly leaves for a competitor, Tommy needs to fill his spot quickly, and takes a chance on the bumbling Daniel, a former avionics engineer and computer geek who seems a bit naïve about high finance and a bit nervous around women. Tommy takes Daniel under his wing, showing him how to dress, where to socialize, and how to charm attractive women. Their relationship is threatened when Daniel begins spending more time with Beth, joining her book club, and becoming her confidant. Tommy begins to question his decision to share his wisdom with Daniel, while Daniel is forced to decide what success really means to him, and where his loyalties lie in life.


== Cast ==
Alexis Bledel as Beth Vest
Scott Porter as Tommy Fielding
Bryan Greenberg as Daniel Seaver
Anna Chlumsky as Lisa
Andrew McCarthy as Cash
Aaron Yoo as Steve-O
Andrew Stewart-Jones as Shakespeare
Denise Vasi as Suki
Jessalyn Wanlim as Jordan
Eric Thal as Stephens
Kate Nauta as Cynthia
Colin Egglesfield as Baker
Adam LeFevre as Billy
Jackie Stewart as Sofia
Monica Steuer as Florist
Darrin Baker as Bobby
Adrian Martinez as Larry


== Soundtracks ==
The Helio Sequence - Lately
Let's Go Sailing - Sideways
Sam Champion - Like a Secret
White Denim - Let's Talk About It
Born Ruffians - I Need a Life
Atmosphere - Party Over Here
Wang Chung - Everybody Have Fun Tonight
The Helio Sequence - Don't Look Away
The Cliks - Oh Yeah
Ra Ra Riot - Can You Tell
Plushgun - Just Impolite
Mancino - Lavender Lake
Copperpot - The Art of Rap
Sam Champion - Be Mine Everyone
Rachel Platten - Seven Weeks
Stars - Your Ex-Lover Is Dead
Say Hi - Hallie and Henry


== Reception ==
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 35% based on reviews from 26 critics. On Metacritic the film has a score of 47% based on reviews from 13 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave it 3 out of 4 and wrote: "It has smart characters, and is wise about the ones who try to tame their intelligence by acting out."Andrew Barker of Variety wrote, that "Lacking much of a satirical bite, the pic's quasi-celebration of crude laddishness becomes oppressive."


== References ==


== External links ==
The Good Guy at AllMovie
The Good Guy at Box Office Mojo
The Good Guy at IMDb