The Big Tease is a 1999 American comedy film starring Craig Ferguson, directed by Kevin Allen, and written by Ferguson and Sacha Gervasi.


== Plot ==
Ferguson plays Crawford Mackenzie, a Scottish hairdresser who, while being filmed as part of a fly-on-the-wall BBC documentary, is invited to the World Hairdresser International Federation annual contest. The documentary team (with Chris Langham playing the interviewer) follows Crawford to L.A., where he discovers that his invitation is to be a member of the audience rather than a competitor. He eventually weasels his way into the contest and produces the greatest creation of his career)


== Cast ==
Craig Ferguson as Crawford Mackenzie
Chris Langham as BBC Interviewer
David Rasche as Stig
Frances Fisher as Candy
Mary McCormack as Monique
Donal Logue as Eamonn
Isabella Aitken as Mrs. Beasie Mackenzie
Kevin Allen as Gareth Trundle
Angela McCluskey as Senga Magoogan
Francine York as Elegant Woman
Nina Siemaszko as Betty Fuego
Charles Napier as Sen. Warren Crockett
Melissa Rivers as Dianne Abbott (credited as Melissa Rosenberg)
David Hasselhoff as Himself
Drew Carey as Himself
Cathy Lee Crosby as Herself


== Production ==
It was filmed on location in Glasgow and Los Angeles. The inspiration for this film came from Craig Ferguson's desire to make a cheerful film celebrating Scottishness, as opposed to the epic nature of films like Braveheart and Rob Roy, or the downbeat quality of Trainspotting and Shallow Grave.
The script was snapped up by Warner Brothers after a five-day bidding war.
Warner Brothers was the only studio prepared to immediately greenlight the film. A fast turnaround was required so it could be shot while Ferguson was on hiatus from The Drew Carey Show.
The Big Tease was not the only hairdressing film in development at the time; The Big Tease was released first in 1999, causing Blow Dry to be delayed until 2001.


=== Casting ===
It took casting director Kris Nicolau about five weeks to fill all seventy roles in the film.Frances Fisher was originally to read for the part of Monique, a role which went to Mary McCormack. Instead she opted to play Candy, the publicist.
Craig Ferguson attended a hairdressing institute to learn all about the art of hairdressing. The hairpieces used in the final Platinum Scissors competition are made from real human hair. Acrylic (which is normally used in wigs) doesn't photograph well and ends up looking like plastic. Each hairpiece weighed about 4 pounds (1.8 kg)


== References ==


== External links ==
The Big Tease at IMDb
The Big Tease at AllMovie
The Big Tease at Box Office Mojo
The Big Tease at Rotten Tomatoes