The Single Moms Club is a 2014 American comedy-drama film produced, written, and directed by Tyler Perry. The film stars Nia Long, Wendi McLendon-Covey, Zulay Henao, Cocoa Brown, Amy Smart, Terry Crews, and Perry. The film was released on March 14, 2014. The film received negative reviews from critics. It grossed $16.4 million against a production budget of $8 million.


== Plot ==
The story is about a group of five single mothers with very different backgrounds who come together when their 11 to 12-year-old kids collectively get in trouble at their private school. 
Hillary (Amy Smart) has three kids, her ex-husband refuses to pay child support because she has the house. Jan (Wendi McLendon-Covey) is an executive and struggles to hold on to her stressful publishing career. May (Nia Long) is a journalist, aspires to be an author, has a drug-addict ex and a teenage son interested to know more about his dad. Esperanza (Zulay Henao) hides her new boyfriend Manny (William Levy) from her ex-husband Santos (Eddie Cibrian) because she fears she might lose his financial support. Lytia (Cocoa Brown), a sassy waitress, tries to keep her youngest son from falling into a life of crime.  
Lytia rushes out of her diner with her two kids to catch the bus, but misses it so Branson (Terry Crews), a personal trainer interested in her, offers her a ride to a school meeting. May meets Jan about publishing her book, but Jan rejects it. May's car won't start so she asks T.K. (Tyler Perry) to help, but leaves her purse behind while rushing to the meeting. 
At the meeting the principal tells the parents that their children vandalized the school and were caught smoking. The board wanted to expel them, but she asked for a probationary period for them. She asks the parents to volunteer for the fundraiser and school dance. The five agree to meet up later to organize. 
After the meeting, T.K. brings May her purse and asks her out to dinner, but she declines. Esperanza goes to her daughter's birthday, where her ex gives his daughter a cell phone, which angers her as it undermines her parenting.
The five meet at Hillary's, Lytia arrives early and finds her distraught, as her ex took everything in the divorce and she had to fire the maid. In addition to organizing the dance, they decide to start The Single Mom's Club to support single mom's everywhere. Afterwards, each woman has her own drama: May picks her son up from school as his father never showed up, Jan didn't get the promotion she'd hoped for, Branson brings Lytia a funeral wreath because he likes her and T.K. read May's book and liked it, so they meet up for coffee to discuss it.  
As the enchanted forest is the theme the group chose for the dance, Hillary asks her new neighbor, Peter (Ryan Eggold) to build the forest for it. The group decide to go out socially every week, so take turns watching each others kids. For an organized movie night, Hillary looks after the kids while Esperanza takes Manny, and May hooks Jan up with Tony (Sean Carrigan), a friend from work. While at the movies May's son runs away and they cannot find him. Blowing up at everyone, May tells them to leave, severing ties with the group. T.K. stays at May's to comfort her. When her son finally comes home, he tells her he went to see his dad. He went by bus, and his dad robbed him for drugs. Upset, he wants to know why she hadn't told him he's an addict. 
Esperanza goes to her ex's car dealership to confront him about undermining her and threatens to take him to court for more child support. By the end, all five women make up with their children, May finally decides to join the ladies at the school dance and The Single Mom's Club is back on.


== Cast ==


== Filming ==
The Single Moms Club began filming on November 26, 2012, in the city of Avondale Estates, Georgia.


== Reception ==
The Single Moms Club received negative reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has an approval rating of 18% based on 28 reviews, with an average rating of 4.4/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "The Single Moms' Club finds Tyler Perry avoiding some of the pitfalls of his earlier work, but continuing to rely on heavy-handed melodrama at the expense of sensible characters or absorbing storylines." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 31 out of 100, based on 16 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".Entertainment Weekly writer Chris Nashawaty rated the film a "C+" grade. He felt the female cast played "clichés cribbed from a booklet of screenwriting Mad Libs," and found Perry's filmmaking to be blunt and unsubtle with its "canned sentimentality, lazy stereotypes, and easy uplift." Jordan Hoffman, writing for the New York Daily News, gave credit to the Jan and Lytia pairing for having "a nice mix of comedy and genuine race/class tension", but criticized the other women for being "soap opera clichés" and the abandonment of the single-working-mother empowerment theme in favor of coincidental and ludicrous relationships, calling it "a film about catharsis and camaraderie, not logic." Alonso Duralde of TheWrap also found criticism in the movie's lazily-written, hard-working female characters and low entertainment value, saying "while it's frequently unintentionally hilarious, it's also crushingly dull."Stephen Schaefer of the Boston Herald saw the women as "one-dimensional" with superficial lives and contrived problems that come to an unearned conclusion, calling the film "a lackluster empowerment fantasy that veers between dull and embarrassing." Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club gave the film a "D+" grade, commending Perry for delivering an "uncharacteristically low-key and charismatic" performance and backhandedly complimented him for creating "a conventionally well-made film", but said that "Perry's movies are rarely dull or repetitive. The Single Moms Club, meandering and schlock-free, is an exception in this regard." Sheila O'Malley from RogerEbert.com found the script's romantic relationships "slapdash" and clashing with the film's overall theme but commended Perry for handling the multiple storylines and the actresses for being "sympathetic and engaging", singling out Nia Long for being "emotionally accessible and funny" and bringing "a fresh and natural presence" to her role.


== Television adaptation ==

On January 9, 2014, it was announced that the Oprah Winfrey Network ordered a drama series based on film. The show premiered on September 9, 2014. Zulay Henao was the only actress from the film to reprise her role (Esperanza).


== References ==


== External links ==
The Single Moms Club at IMDb
Tyler Perry's The Single Moms Club at AllMovie
Tyler Perry's The Single Moms Club at Box Office Mojo