The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle is a 2000 American live-action/animated adventure comedy film directed by Des McAnuff and produced by Universal Pictures, based on the television cartoon of the same name by Jay Ward. Animated characters Rocky and Bullwinkle share the screen with live actors portraying Fearless Leader (Robert De Niro, who also co-produced the film), Boris Badenov (Jason Alexander) and Natasha Fatale (Rene Russo) along with Randy Quaid, Piper Perabo, Kenan Thompson and Kel Mitchell. June Foray reprised her role as Rocky, while Keith Scott (no relation to original voice actor Bill Scott) voiced Bullwinkle and the film's narrator. It also features cameo appearances by performers including James Rebhorn,  Paget Brewster, Janeane Garofalo, John Goodman, David Alan Grier, Don Novello, Jon Polito, Carl Reiner, Whoopi Goldberg, Max Grodenchik, Jonathan Winters and Billy Crystal.
Released on June 30, 2000, the film was a box office bomb, grossing $35.1 million worldwide against its $76 million budget and received mixed reviews with criticisms toward its writing, plot, and humor while praising the performances, visual effects, and faithfulness to its source material.


== Plot ==
Rocky the Squirrel and Bullwinkle J. Moose live a melancholic life thirty-six years after their television series was cancelled. Their animated home, Frostbite Falls, is deforested, Rocky can no longer fly, and their show’s unseen Narrator lives with his mother.
Meanwhile, their archenemies, Fearless Leader, Boris Badenov, and Natasha Fatale, have all lost power in Pottsylvania following the end of the Cold War. They escape by tunneling to a Hollywood film studio, convincing executive Minnie Mogul to sign a rights contract to their series and green-lighting a potential movie. Dragging the villains out of the animated world transforms them into live action characters.
Six months later, Fearless Leader and his minions have founded RBTV (“Really Bad Television”), a cable television network that programmed to control population by brainwashing American audiences into voting Fearless Leader in as the next President of the United States. FBI Director, Cappy von Trapment, deploys agent Karen Sympathy to recruit Rocky and Bullwinkle to stop RBTV’s intended broadcast. Karen travels to a movie-generating lighthouse in Los Angeles, summoning Rocky, Bullwinkle, and the Narrator into the real world.
Upon learning of Rocky and Bullwinkle’s return, Fearless Leader deploys Boris and Natasha to destroy them. They are given the CDI (“Computer-Degenerating Imagery”), a laptop-like weapon that can trap cartoon characters within the internet. The villains’ truck is stolen by Karen, who is swiftly arrested by Oklahoma State Police troopers when Natasha poses as her. Boris and Natasha later steal a helicopter to continue their pursuit. Karen is sent to prison, but manipulates a love-struck Swedish guard named Ole to help her escape.
Rocky and Bullwinkle are picked up by students Martin and Lewis, who attend Bullwinkle’s alma mater Wossamotta U. Boris and Natasha launch an elaborate plan to assassinate Bullwinkle, donating a cheque to the university in his name, inspiring the academic board to award Bullwinkle with an honorary “Mooster’s Degree”. As Bullwinkle addresses the students, Rocky regains his ability to fly, stopping Boris from killing Bullwinkle with the CDI.
Boris and Natasha chase Rocky and Bullwinkle through Chicago, but disintegrate their own helicopter. Karen reunites with Rocky and Bullwinkle, but the trio are arrested again by numerous state troopers. They are trialled for numerous misdemeanors  (California, Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, Kansas, Oklahoma, Missouri, Illinois, Indiana and Ohio), but the presiding Judge Cameo (Whoopi Goldberg) throws the case out upon recognizing Rocky and Bullwinkle, informing the district attorney that celebrities are above the law.
The trio buy a rickety biplane and escape Boris and Natasha once again. The two villains consider retiring from villain's job, lying to Fearless Leader that they had defeated Rocky and Bullwinkle, confident that they have already won. Meanwhile, the heroes’ plane begins to lose altitude due to the combined weight. Rocky flies Karen to New York City to stop the broadcast, but they are captured by Boris and Natasha. Fearless Leader initiates his plan and broadcasts programs to brainwash most of the country.
Bullwinkle crashes the plane outside the White House in Washington, D.C., finding President Signoff has been brainwashed. Cappy scans Bullwinkle into the White House’s computer system, e-mailing him to RBTV just as Fearless Leader addresses the nation, disrupting the broadcast. A chaotic fight breaks out, leading to the capture of the villains. Karen, Rocky, and Bullwinkle then ask the American public to replant Frostbite Falls. Bullwinkle accidentally activates the CDI, transforming the villains back to their animated forms and banishing them to the internet once and for all.
In the aftermath, Rocky and Bullwinkle’s careers are renewed in RBTV (renamed to “Rocky and Bullwinkle Television”; Bullwinkle jokes "What's the difference?".) Karen goes on a date with Ole, as Rocky, Bullwinkle, and the Narrator return home to a rejuvenated Frostbite Falls.


== Cast ==
June Foray as the voice of Rocky, animated Natasha Fatale and Narrator's Mother
Keith Scott as the voice of Bullwinkle, animated Fearless Leader, animated Boris Badenov, The Narrator and RBTV Announcer 
Piper Perabo as Karen Sympathy
Julia McAnuff as young Karen
Jason Alexander as Boris Badenov
Rene Russo as Natasha Fatale
Robert De Niro as Fearless Leader
Randy Quaid as Cappy "Frank" von Trapment
Paget Brewster as Jenny Spy
Janeane Garofalo as Minnie Mogul
Carl Reiner as P.G. Biggershot
Jonathan Winters as Whoppa Chopper Pilot, Ohio Cop with Bullhorn, Old Jeb
John Goodman as Oklahoma State Trooper
John Brandon as General Admission
Kenan Thompson as Lewis
Kel Mitchell as Martin
James Rebhorn as President Signoff
David Alan Grier as Measures
Ed Gale as The Mole
Lily Nicksay as Sydney
Jon Polito as Schoentell
Don Novello as Fruit Vendor Twins
Victor Raider-Wexler as Igor
Phil Proctor as RBTV floor director
Dian Bachar as RBTV Studio Technician/Scientist
Drena De Niro as RBTV Lackey
Jeffrey Ross as District Attorney
Wesley Mann as Clerk
Rod Biermann as Ole
Adam Miller as young Ole
Harrison Young as General Foods
Max Grodénchik and Eugene Alper as Horse Spies
Alexis Thorpe as Supermodel
Taraji P. Henson as Left-Wing Student
Norman Lloyd as Wossamotta U. President
Mark Holton as FBI Agent - Potato
Doug Jones as FBI Agent - Carrot
Arvie Lowe Jr. as Sharp-Eyed Student
Susan Berman as Weasel
Chip Chinery and Ellis E. Williams as Security guards
Elwood Edwards (uncredited) as "You've got mail" (voice)
Whoopi Goldberg (uncredited) as Judge Cameo
Billy Crystal (uncredited) as Mattress salesman


== Music ==
"Dreamer" - Supertramp
"Be Ya Self" - Tarsha Vega
"Hooray for Hollywood"
"The Blue Danube" - Johann Strauss II
"Secret Agent Man" - Johnny Rivers
"The Child in You"
"Through the Eyes of a Child" - Lisa McClowry
"Cryptik Souls Crew" - Len
"Hail Pottsylvania"There was also a soundtrack for the film released by DreamWorks Records.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Rocky & Bullwinkle opened in 2,460 venues, earning $6,814,270 in its opening weekend and ranking fifth in the North American box office and third among the week's new releases. It closed on October 5, 2000 with a domestic total of $26,005,820 and $9,129,000 in other territories for a worldwide gross of $35,134,820, making it a box office bomb.The failure of the film was attributed to the film not being fresh enough for young audiences or appealing to the nostalgia of Baby boomers.


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 43% based on 100 reviews, with an average rating of 4.81/10. The critical consensus stated, "Though the film stays true to the nature of the original cartoon, the script is disappointing and not funny." On Metacritic the film has a score of 36 out of 100 based on reviews from 30 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade "B" on scale of A to F.Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave it 3 out of 4 stars and wrote: "Has the same mixture of dumb puns, corny sight gags and sly, even sophisticated in-jokes. It's a lot of fun."


=== Accolades ===


== Home media ==
The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle was released on VHS and DVD on February 13, 2001, and on Blu-ray on May 15, 2018.


== References ==


== External links ==
The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle at IMDb
The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle at The Big Cartoon DataBase
The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle at the TCM Movie Database
The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle at Box Office Mojo
Roos, John (April 12, 1999). "Keeping Her Father's Legacy Alive". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 7, 2010.