The Pink Panther 2 is a 2009 American comedy-mystery film directed by Harald Zwart. It is the eleventh installment in The Pink Panther film series and the sequel to the 2006 film The Pink Panther, a reboot of the popular comedy series. The film was released on February 6, 2009 in North America. In the film, Inspector Clouseau must team up with detectives from other countries to rout a daring burglar, The Tornado, who has returned after a decade's inactivity.
Steve Martin, who reprised the role of Clouseau, originated by Peter Sellers, polished the original script written by Scott Neustadter and Michael H. Weber in November 2006. MGM, partnering with Columbia Pictures on the sequel, hired the team of Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel to perform a further rewrite in January 2007. Principal photography began in Paris on August 20, 2007, then moved to Boston several weeks later, where filming ended on November 2, 2007.
Aishwarya Rai Bachchan appears as the criminology expert Sonia Solandres. John Cleese replaces Kevin Kline as Chief Inspector Dreyfus with Jean Reno and Emily Mortimer reprising their roles as Clouseau's partner Ponton and Clouseau's girlfriend Nicole. Beyoncé did not return for the sequel. Andy García, Yuki Matsuzaki and Alfred Molina round out the cast as detectives, Italian Inspector Vincenzo Brancaleone, Japanese Inspector Kenji Mazuto and British Chief Inspector Randall Pepperidge. It was released on Blu-ray Disc and DVD on June 23, 2009.


== Plot ==
When master thief “The Tornado” steals priceless artifacts from around the world, the French government assembles a “Dream Team” of detectives to solve the case. Inspector Clouseau is reassigned from his task as a parking officer by Chief Inspector Dreyfus to join the detectives in Japan, site of the Tornado's latest heist. At the airport, Clouseau tells his partner Ponton that he predicts that the Pink Panther diamond will be stolen in France and soon be rendered redundant for him to even leave France after all. As soon as Clouseau crosses the borders of France, news breaks that the Pink Panther diamond has indeed been stolen, prompting Clouseau to gloat that his presence has kept the diamond safe and that he had known it would happen all along.
Clouseau joins the other members of the Dream Team: Detective Randall Pepperidge, from Great Britain; Vincenzo, from Italy; Kenji, an electronics specialist from Japan; and Sonia Solandres, a researcher and criminology expert from India. They go to Rome to investigate a black market fence, Alonso Avellaneda. Assuming Avellaneda is the Tornado, the Dream Team question him while Clouseau snoops around. Avellaneda demonstrates that he lacks a bullet-wound the Tornado received years ago; after the detectives leave, Avellaneda meets with the real Tornado.
That night, Clouseau and Ponton spy on Avellaneda at a restaurant using an audio bug. The mission is compromised when they find Vincenzo and Nicole, Clouseau's girlfriend, together at the restaurant. Banned from the restaurant for burning it down months earlier, Clouseau disguises himself as a dancer and switches the bug to Nicole's table, burning down the restaurant again in the process. Meanwhile, the Tornado steals the Pope's ring, turning public opinion against the Dream Team.
When Clouseau's acts of foolishness aggravate the situation, he is voted off the team; only Sonia sympathizes with him. Clouseau is later called to an office to find the Tornado has killed himself, leaving a suicide note that claims he destroyed the Pink Panther – considering it so beautiful that he could not allow anyone else to own it – and left the other treasures to be recovered. Examining a key found in the Pope's Chambers, the Dream Team match the dead man's DNA with DNA recovered from when the Tornado was shot, and believe they have solved the case; Clouseau is unconvinced.
A celebration is thrown in the Dream Team's honor. Uninvited, Clouseau discovers a clue from the license plate of Sonia's car and calls Ponton. Clouseau tries to tell Dreyfus that the real thief is still at large, but is ignored. Dreyfus announces to the group that Clouseau believes Sonia was the thief, and the detectives jokingly work out a plausible explanation: as the Tornado's ex-lover, she would have in-depth knowledge of his methods, and could have drawn attention to the thefts of the other artifacts, leaving her free to sell the Pink Panther. Nicole, realizing Clouseau could be correct as she, too, was suspecting Sonia and having seen how Clouseau caught the same trick used during his first big break, asks Sonia to empty her purse. After initially trying to leave, Sonia ultimately pulls out a gun, threatening to shoot Nicole, and shoots Clouseau but the bullet ricochets off his Légion d'honneur medal. A chase ensues, with all members of the Dream Team but Clouseau making fools of themselves through various accidents caused by Clouseau's clumsiness.
Finally cornered, Sonia threatens to destroy the Pink Panther and, goaded by Clouseau, she does. Attempting to escape, Sonia is knocked out by Ponton and arrested. Clouseau reveals that what Sonia destroyed was a fake gem, as Clouseau kept the real diamond in his possession in order to protect it. Clouseau had a feeling that the gem would be stolen again, so before anything could happen, he had a fake Pink Panther diamond made and switched them at the museum before leaving France. The Tornado, an expert on gems, would have recognized the Pink Panther to be a fake; therefore, Clouseau deduced that his suicide note was forged and he was murdered. Clouseau reveals that he had ticketed Sonia's car two days before the Pink Panther was stolen – contradicting her alibi of being delayed to the original crime scene by her flight – which revealed to him that Sonia was the culprit. Dreyfus tries to claim credit for having appointed Clouseau to his parking job, which Clouseau, remembering Dreyfus told him to deny this to anyone who asked, rebukes.
Clouseau marries Nicole in a ceremony officiated by Dreyfus and attended by the Dream Team, ending in chaos when Dreyfus accidentally destroys a security camera with a champagne cork, summoning the Black Berets. Clouseau and Nicole leave for their honeymoon as the animated Pink Panther watches, before closing the doors and winking at the camera.


== Cast ==
Steve Martin as Inspector Jacques Clouseau   A clumsy police officer and now-recognized "Protector of the Pink Panther", who joins the Dream Team
Aishwarya Rai Bachchan as Sonia Solandres, a.k.a. the Tornado An Indian international jewel thief using the Dream Team as a strategic cover.
Jean Reno as Gendarme Gilbert Ponton  Clouseau's assistant and sidekick
Emily Mortimer as Nicole Durant-Clouseau  Clouseau's girlfriend and later wife
Andy García as Vincenzo Roccara Squarcialupi Brancaleon An Italian businessman who joins the Dream Team
Alfred Molina as Randall Pepperidge  A British police detective who joins the Dream Team
Yuki Matsuzaki as Kenji Mazuto  A Japanese technology expert who joins the Dream Team
John Cleese as Chief Inspector Charles Dreyfus, Clouseau's boss who often gives him meaningless assignments to get him out of his hair.
Lily Tomlin as Mrs. Yvette Berenger, a manners teacher who often calls Clouseau into her office to discuss his inappropriate suggestive manners.
Johnny Hallyday as Laurence Millikin, a man who is incorrectly suspected to be the Tornado.
Jeremy Irons as Alonso Avellaneda, a man the Dream Team checks out as the first suspect.
Geoffrey Palmer as Commissioner Joubert
Yevgeni Lazarev as the Pope.
Christiane Amanpour as herself.
Sharon Tay as CNN Reporter.
Jack Metzger as Antoine


== Production ==
The film was shot in Paris, France, and Boston, Bedford, Chelsea, Westwood, and Winchester, Massachusetts from August 20 to November 2, 2007.


== Release ==
The Pink Panther 2 was theatrically released on February 6, 2009 by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and Columbia Pictures and was released on DVD and Blu-ray on June 23, 2009 by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment and MGM Home Entertainment.


== Soundtrack ==
Composer Christophe Beck returns to compose the score for the sequel as well as adapting Henry Mancini's Pink Panther theme.

The Pink Panther Theme
Habanera Para Baile
Sonia's Love
Finale in C Major
Bridal Chorus


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
The Pink Panther 2 received worse reviews from critics than the original. On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 12% based on 137 reviews with an average rating of 3.5/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Underutilizing its talented cast, The Pink Panther 2 is little more than a series of lame slapstick gags". On Metacritic, the film has a score of 36 out of 100 based on 30 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale.


=== Box office ===
The Pink Panther 2 grossed $35.9 million in North America and $40 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $75.9 million, against a budget of $70 million. The film made $11.6 million in its opening weekend, finishing fourth at the box office. The film was released in the United Kingdom on February 13, 2009, and only opened on #8.


== Future ==
On November 19, 2020, Metro-Goldwyn Mayer announced that a new Pink Panther film is in the works with Sonic the Hedgehog director Jeff Fowler attached to direct and Chris Bremner attached to write the script. Unlike the previous films which only focused on Inspector Clouseau the new movie will actually focus on both Clouseau and the animated Pink Panther cartoon character.


== See also ==
List of The Pink Panther cartoons


== References ==


== External links ==
Sony Official Website
The Pink Panther 2 at Box Office Mojo
20 Questions with Inspector Clouseau
The Pink Panther 2 at IMDb
The Pink Panther 2 at AllMovie
The Pink Panther 2 Photo Call in Paris - Gallery