The One is a 2001 American science fiction action film directed by James Wong, written by Wong and Glen Morgan, and starring Jet Li, Delroy Lindo, Carla Gugino, and Jason Statham. 
The film, which deals with the concept of multiverses and interdimensional travel, follows Gabriel Yulaw (Jet Li), a rogue agent who travels to parallel realities in order for him to kill other versions of himself to become a mythical super-being known as "The One". Li plays a dual role as Yulaw and Gabe Law, an LASD cop who teams up with a multiverse agent to prevent Yulaw from becoming the One.
The film was released in the United States by Columbia Pictures on November 2, 2001 and received negative critical reviews.


== Plot ==
Gabriel Yulaw (Jet Li), once an agent of the MultiVerse Authority (MVA) which polices interdimensional travel, seeks to hunt down all variations of himself in alternate universes. By killing 124 versions of his other selves and absorbing their life energies, Yulaw believes that he will become a superpowered-godlike being called "The One". 
After killing Lawless, the 123rd variation in the Anubis Universe, Yulaw is captured by MVA agents Rodecker (Delroy Lindo) and Funsch (Jason Statham) and taken back to the MVA headquarters in the Alpha Universe. After he is sentenced to life in the Stygian penal colony in the Hades Universe, Yulaw manages to escape and teleports to the Charis Universe where the last variation of himself lives.
The last known variation, Gabe Law, is a police officer working in the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department. For two years, Gabe has been experiencing increases in strength, speed, and mental ability, but neither he nor his wife T.K. (Carla Gugino) can understand why. While transporting a prisoner, Gabe "feels" Yulaw's presence in time to avoid being shot. Gabe sustains an injury after falling from a wall which Yulaw scales with ease. Rodecker and Funsch arrive in time to stop Yulaw from finishing off Gabe.
Although unfamiliar with interdimensional travel, Gabe realizes that Yulaw is identical to him in every way. Rodecker and Funsch track Yulaw to the hospital where Gabe is being examined. Yulaw deters them from shooting him because if he is killed, Gabe would then be left as the One. Dressed alike and identical to each other, Gabe and Yulaw's battle confuses the other police officers. Both Gabe and Yulaw manage to escape the hospital.
The MVA agents deviate from their orders and split up. Rodecker pursues and fights Yulaw but is killed when the latter breaks his neck. Funsch catches up with Gabe and explains to him that there are multiple universes with wormholes briefly connecting them at uncontrollable times. Yulaw sneaks into Gabe's residence where T.K., believing him to be Gabe, agrees to hide him from the police. She realizes that Yulaw is deceiving her but not in time to avoid being captured. Gabe arrives, only to watch helplessly as Yulaw kills T.K. Funsch finds a guiltridden Gabe and both team up to find Yulaw at the next wormhole.
Gabe and Funsch arrive at an industrial plant, where they encounter and fight Yulaw. Funsch is easily defeated but Gabe and Yulaw are more evenly matched. Gabe manages to gain the upper hand but only seconds before the wormhole arrives. All three of them are sucked into it and collapse on the floor of the MVA headquarters. Yulaw is transported immediately to the Hades Universe after a failed attempt to switch places with Gabe. The MVA then prepares to send Gabe back to his own universe, where he will be arrested and put into prison for the crimes that Yulaw committed. Recalling an earlier conversation with Gabe, Funsch sends him to a different universe in which Gabe can have a normal life again from when he first met T.K.
Meanwhile, Yulaw, now on the penal colony in the Hades Universe, declares that he will still become the One and then proceeds to battle a prison inmate. The camera then pulls back to show an army of other prison inmates taking on Yulaw on top of a ziggurat.


== Cast ==
Jet Li as Gabriel Yulaw / Gabe Law / Lawless
Jason Statham as Evan Funsch
Delroy Lindo as Harry Rodecker / Gas Station Attendant
Carla Gugino as T.K. Law / Massie Walsh
James Morrison as Officer Bobby Aldrich / "A" World Inmate #1
Dylan Bruno as Officer Yates
Richard Steinmetz as Officer D'Antoni
Steve Rankin as MVA Supervisor
Dean Norris as Sgt. Siegel
Harriet Sansom Harris as Nurse Besson
Tucker Smallwood as Prison Warden
Archie Kao as Woo
Mark Borchardt as Cesar
Doug Savant as Cop (uncredited)


== Production ==
Originally the film was to have starred with Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson, before Li assumed the lead role.The hospital scenes were filmed at the North Hollywood Medical Center.The documentary Jet Li is 'The One' on the special features section on the DVD explains that both Gabriel Yulaw and "Gabe" Law use martial arts that represent their personalities. Yulaw uses Xingyiquan (The Shape-Will Fist), characterized by aggressive linear movements, while Gabe uses Baguazhang (The Eight Trigram Palms) which uses subtle, circular movements. These martial arts are confirmed by their own personalities as Yulaw is very direct, not caring whom he hurts, while Gabe believes life goes in a circle, perfectly balanced.


== Background information ==
As part of the promotion for the movie, there was an official website for the fictional Multiverse Authority called the "MVA Mainframe". Although the site is now defunct, it provided detailed background material on the storyline and some of the characters, including some that were not in the film.


== Soundtrack ==
The score was composed by Trevor Rabin and was released on December 11, 2001, but no soundtrack album was released. Noted songs in the film were Drowning Pool's "Bodies" and "Sinner", "Down with the Sickness" by the band Disturbed, "Awake" by Godsmack, "Train of Dreams" by Jesse Dayton and two tracks by Papa Roach, "Blood Brothers" and "Last Resort".


== Reception ==
The One grossed US$19,112,404 (an average of US$6,604 per screen) in its opening weekend in North America, opening at #2 (behind Monsters, Inc.), and eventually grossed US$43,905,746. In other territories, the film grossed US$28,783,380, making for a worldwide total of US$72,689,126.


=== Critical response ===
The film received mostly negative reviews. Based on 86 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes as of August 2019, 14% of critics have given the film a positive review, with an average rating of 3.94/10. The site's critics consensus reads, "The One plays more like a video game than a movie and borrows freely from other, better sci-fi actioners, burying Jet Li's spectacular talents under heaps of editing and special effects." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 25 out of 100 based on reviews from 21 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade "B" on scale of A to F.Roger Ebert gave the film 1.5 out of 4 stars, calling it "brainless high-tech action without interesting dialogue, characters, motivation or texture." Robert Koehler of Variety wrote: "The combo of cheesy effects and martial arts choreographer Cory Yuen's unimaginative staging results in something that's martial artless."Loren King of the Chicago Tribune gave a favorable review, writing that the movie delivered "the high-octane sequences starring martial-arts expert Jet Li with precision and well-crafted pace." King gave a score of 3 out of 4. Sean Axmaker of the Seattle Post-Intelligencer also gave a favourable review noting that James Wong "manage[d] to create a fun, inventive, mischievously tongue-in-cheek showcase" giving a B- score.


== Home media ==
The home video release of The One took place on August 19, 2002. The DVD release contained audio commentary, interviews with James Wong, Jet Li and some more. Almar Haflidason of the BBC reviewed the DVD release giving a score of 4 out of 5.


== References ==


== External links ==
The One at IMDb
The One on Jet Li's website
One, The (Special Edition) - DVD on Sony Pictures Entertainment