The Bounty Hunter is a 2010 American action comedy film directed by Andy Tennant, starring Jennifer Aniston and Gerard Butler. The story centers on a bounty hunter hired to retrieve his ex-wife, who has skipped bail. The film was released in the United States on March 19, 2010.


== Plot ==
Milo Boyd is a former New York Police Department detective who works as a bail enforcement agent (bounty hunter).  Milo's ex-wife, Nicole Hurley, is an investigative reporter who has been arrested for assaulting a police officer.
When Nicole receives a tip on a story, an apparent suicide that may have been a murder, she skips her bond hearing to meet her informant, causing the judge to revoke her bail and issue a warrant for her arrest. Just before Nicole arrives, her informant, Jimmy is kidnapped.
Milo is ecstatic when Nicole's bail bondsman, Sid, offers him the job of bringing her to jail, for a bounty of $5,000. After questioning Nicole's mother Kitty, Milo apprehends her at a race track in New Jersey, throws her into his car trunk and drives back towards Manhattan. Nicole manages to escape briefly before he catches up with her.
They are being stalked by two thugs sent by Irene, a bookie, because of his outstanding gambling debts; Nicole by corrupt cop Earl Mahler, who is connected with the story she is investigating, and both by Nicole's lovestruck coworker Stewart, bent on rescuing her from Milo. Irene's thugs mistake Stewart for Milo and mistakenly kidnap Stewart.
Earl tries to kill Nicole, but both Milo and Nicole narrowly escape. Milo is not interested in explanations until Nicole admits that she's found evidence that implicates their mutual friend and Milo's ex-partner on the police force, Bobby, indicating that he is involved with Earl. Milo decides to investigate with her.
Clues from Earl's car lead them to a country club, where they learn from a caddie that Earl owns a tattoo parlor in Queens, so they start to make their way there. Bobby warns the pair to stay off the road.
The nearest hotel is the bed and breakfast where they spent their honeymoon. They discover they still have feelings for each other and admit their mistakes. Nicole, coming out of the bathroom, overhears Milo telling Sid that he may sleep with Nicole, but that he's still taking her to jail. She handcuffs Milo to the bed and makes her way to the tattoo parlor, finding Jimmy and freeing him before she is captured by Irene's thugs.
Milo rescues her at a strip club. Then, a police force friend tells him that Bobby is heading to the police's evidence warehouse, which is being relocated to a new building. Bobby confronts Earl, a former friend who has used Bobby's name to gain access to the warehouse and steal a large amount of narcotics and cash. Bobby decides to arrest Earl, but Earl draws a gun and shoots him. Milo and Nicole enter the warehouse and Milo is ambushed, but Earl surrenders when Nicole points a shotgun at him.
Bobby explains that Earl was using him, as well as the man who supposedly committed suicide, to gain access to the warehouse. There was no proof, so Bobby was waiting for Earl to make his move before arresting him. Milo proudly notes that Earl might have gotten away with it if Nicole hadn't picked up certain clues. He and Nicole appear to have reconciled. They concede that sometimes their jobs have to come first. Milo turns Nicole in to the police, so she can make her court hearing the next day.
On his way out of the precinct, Milo runs into a cop who insulted him earlier and punches him in the face. He is arrested and put in the cell next to Nicole's. He reminds her that it is their anniversary and they have to spend it together. Through the bars they admit their love and kiss.


== Cast ==
Jennifer Aniston as Nicole Hurley (previously Boyd), a Daily News reporter and Milo's ex-wife
Gerard Butler as Milo Boyd, a bounty hunter, former police officer and Nicole's ex-husband
Jason Sudeikis as Stewart, Nicole's creepy co-worker and stalker who has unrequited feelings for her
Jeff Garlin as Sid, Milo's friend and employer as a bail bondsman
Cathy Moriarty as Irene, a gift shop owner and local bookmaker
Ritchie Coster as Ray, one of Irene's minions
Joel Marsh Garland as Dwight, one of Irene's minions
Siobhan Fallon Hogan as Teresa, the secretary of Sid's business
Peter Greene as Earl Mahler, a corrupt cop
Dorian Missick as Bobby Jenkins, NYPD detective and Milo's best friend
Carol Kane as Dawn, a co-owner of a bed and breakfast
Adam LeFevre as Edmund, a co-owner of a bed and breakfast
Adam Rose as Jimmy, a bartender at a cop bar who gives info to reporters for money
Christine Baranski as Kitty Hurley, Nicole's caring but perverted and vain mother and Milo's ex-Mother-in-law
Matt Malloy as Gary, a co-worker of Nicole's
Christian Borle as Caddie


== Release ==


=== Box office ===
The Bounty Hunter was released alongside Repo Men and Diary of a Wimpy Kid. It grossed $20.7 million in its opening weekend. As of July 5, 2010 it has grossed $67,061,228 in North America and $69,031,265 internationally for a worldwide total of $136,333,522.


=== Critical response ===
 On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 12%, based on 146 reviews, and an average rating of 3.4/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Gerard Butler and Jennifer Aniston remain as attractive as ever, but The Bounty Hunter's formula script doesn't know what to do with them – or the audience's attention." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 22 out of 100, based on 31 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B–" on an A+ to F scale.Roger Ebert gave the film one-and-a-half stars out of four, commenting that "neither [Aniston nor Butler] is allowed to speak more than efficient sentences to advance the plot" and that it is rife with "exhausted action clichés." A.O. Scott of The New York Times gave the film a completely negative review and said it was rated PG-13 for "witless sexual innuendo and witless violence." Kerry Lengel of The Arizona Republic gave the film three and a half stars out of five: "As formula films go, The Bounty Hunter is more enjoyable than most, even if it packs in as many clichés as any." However, Lengel did praise Aniston's and Butler's performances, but was critical of the "improbable" plot.


=== Accolades ===


=== Home media ===
The Bounty Hunter was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc on July 13, 2010. The only extra material is three featurettes ("Making The Bounty Hunter", "Rules for Outwitting a Bounty Hunter", and "Stops Along the Road: Hunting Locations"). The film grossed $23,310,266 from DVD sales in North America.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
The Bounty Hunter at IMDb
The Bounty Hunter at AllMovie
The Bounty Hunter at Rotten Tomatoes
The Bounty Hunter at Box Office Mojo