The Sweetest Thing is a 2002 American romantic comedy film directed by Roger Kumble and written by Nancy Pimental, who based the characters on herself and friend Kate Walsh. It stars Cameron Diaz, Christina Applegate and Selma Blair.


== Plot ==
In an opening scene, a group of men are interviewed regarding Christina Walters who introduce her as a player and a user of men in the swinging singles market. The men include:

A neurotic loser who gets a nosebleed when she fails to call him after promising to do so.
A man who saw the film Swingers and is calling her after three days, only to find that she gave him a number for Moviefone.
A man who is denied by Christina so he claims that she is a lesbian.
A very talkative man who ends up propelling himself off an exercise bike when he starts talking about Christina.The scene shifts back to the sexist man whose claims of Christina's lesbianism causes an entire crowd of women to attack him with baseball bats and the film moves along, introducing Christina Walters, a 28-year-old successful interior designer, and Courtney Rockcliffe, a divorce lawyer, as they console their friend and roommate Jane, who had recently broken up with her boyfriend Howard, by taking her out to a dance club and cancel their plans to stay in for pizza. At the club, Jane feels out of place and Christina grabs a man passing by to set Jane up with. She meets Peter Donahue, who confronts Christina for her methods before disappearing for the night. While in the bathroom with Courtney, she calls him by name, leading her to suspect that he got under Christina's skin and she is actually in love with him, which she denies. After running into Peter again, Christina buys him a drink and they spend time together. He explains that he will be attending a wedding on Saturday, and that he is at the club with his obnoxious, womanizing brother Roger to celebrate. He invites Christina and Courtney to an after-party at their hotel, but Christina goes home and later regrets not going.
The next day, Christina cannot stop talking about Peter, while Jane deals with an embarrassing "cleanup" from her fun with the man she met the night before. In the unedited version, Jane returns to the lunch and the women talk about always complimenting men for the sizes of their penises, eventually breaking out into a restaurant-wide "Penis Song". Courtney arranges for Christina and herself to travel to Somerset, where Peter's brother's wedding is to take place, and they meet Jane's boyfriend. As a recurring gag, they indicate that he is well-endowed, causing misery and enjoyment from Jane. After they leave in Courtney's Saab 9-5, Christina and Courtney go on a series of misadventures including an exploding toilet, a glory hole discovery, and a motorcyclist who is led to believe Christina is giving Courtney oral sex. Meanwhile, Jane encounters her boyfriend at her retail job and is nearly caught having sex with him in the changing rooms. When Christina and Courtney finally arrive in Somerset, they visit a store to replace their wet and ruined clothes, only to come out in extremely gaudy, indiscreet outfits. Christina begins having second thoughts, but a series of coincidences causes a change of heart, and they attend Peter's brother's wedding. There, they discover that it is Peter, not Roger, who is getting married, and the pair nearly ruin the ceremony in their attempt to escape. Peter and his fiancée then decide that they do not want to marry each other and they call off the wedding (much to her father's chagrin), while Christina returns home and back to a newly unfulfilled life of being single again. Later, Peter finds Christina's address in the log at the store they bought their clothes in and tracks her down. Christina, determined not to fear the commitment, kisses Peter and then walks away disappointed.
Sometime later, Courtney is dating a doctor and is clearly very attracted to him, and Peter is interviewed like the men at the beginning of the film, retelling his version of the events calling her a bitch and a player, but ultimately revealing that he and Christina are together, having gotten married and are living very happily with Jane and Courtney and Roger as well.


== Cast ==
Cameron Diaz as Christina Walters
Christina Applegate as Courtney Rockcliffe
Selma Blair as Jane Burns
Thomas Jane as Peter Donahue
Frank Grillo as Andy
Jason Bateman as Roger Donahue
Eddie McClintock as Michael
Lillian Adams as Aunt Frida
James Mangold as Dr. Greg
Johnny Messner as Todd
Parker Posey as Judy Webb
Georgia Engel as Vera
Johnathon Schaech as Leather Coat Guy (uncredited)
Love Jones as Wedding Band
Mitch Mullany as Craig


== Home media ==
The film was released on DVD and VHS on August 20, 2002.


== Reception ==
On its opening weekend, it earned US$9,430,667 on 2,670 screens, ranking #3 behind Changing Lanes and Panic Room. It eventually grossed US$68,696,770 worldwide.


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 26% based on 107 reviews with the consensus: "A collection of hit-or-miss gags tied together by a thin plot". On Metacritic, the film has an average score of 32 out of 100, based on 30 critics. Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade C+ on scale of A to F.It was among Ebert & Roeper's "Worst of 2002", in the category "Big Stars in Big Bombs".


== References ==


== External links ==
The Sweetest Thing at IMDb
The Sweetest Thing at AllMovie
The Sweetest Thing at Metacritic
The Sweetest Thing at Rotten Tomatoes