The Santa Clause 2 is a 2002 American Christmas comedy film directed by Michael Lembeck in his directorial debut. It is a sequel to The Santa Clause (1994) and the second installment in the Santa Clause film series. All of the principal actors from the first film, including Tim Allen, Judge Reinhold, Wendy Crewson, David Krumholtz, and Eric Lloyd, reprise their roles, and are joined by Elizabeth Mitchell and Spencer Breslin.
Released on November 1, 2002, the film received mixed reviews from critics and grossed $172 million worldwide on a $65 million budget. It was followed by another sequel, The Santa Clause 3: The Escape Clause, released in 2006.


== Plot ==
Eight years after the events of The Santa Clause, Scott Calvin has become a great Santa Claus at the North Pole, until Head Elf Bernard and Curtis, the Keeper of the Handbook of Christmas, inform him that there is another clause — the "Mrs. Clause". Scott is now pressed to get married before the next Christmas Eve or the clause will be broken and he will stop being Santa forever. At the same time, Abby the Elf delivers even more distressing news: Scott's teenage son Charlie is on the naughty list. Scott must return to his home to search for a wife and set things right with Charlie. He brings this up when visited by the Council of Legendary Figures, consisting of Mother Nature, Father Time, Cupid, the Easter Bunny, the Tooth Fairy, and the Sandman. To cover for Santa's prolonged absence, Curtis helps Scott create a life-sized animatronic Santa clone, much to Bernard's horror. However, at Santa's request, Bernard reluctantly plays along, and tells the other elves that Santa had a makeover, so they won't question the double's synthetic appearance.
Because of the impending end of his contract, Scott undergoes a "de-Santafication process" that gradually turns him back into Scott Calvin. He has a limited amount of magic to help him. Scott returns home to his former wife Laura, her husband Neal, their six-year-old daughter Lucy, and Charlie, whom Scott realizes has been vandalizing his school to get attention. He and Charlie face the ire of school principal Carol Newman when Charlie defaces the lockers.
At the North Pole, Toy Santa follows the rulebook too literally and begins to think that everyone in the world is naughty because of their small mistakes. As a result, Toy Santa takes over the North Pole using giant toy soldiers he made himself and unveils his plan to the elves to give lumps of coal to the world. Bernard exposes Toy Santa as a fraud, and Toy Santa places him under house arrest.
After a few failed dates, Scott finds himself falling for Carol. He accompanies her in a horse-drawn sleigh to the faculty Christmas party, during which she confesses she used to believe in Santa as a child, until she was forced to stop doing so by her parents after fighting with children who told her Santa wasn't real. Using a little of his Christmas magic, Scott enlivens the otherwise dull party by presenting everyone with their childhood dream gifts. He makes a special presentation to Carol, and, with his last remnant of magic, wins her over and they kiss under mistletoe. However, when Scott attempts to explain to her that he is Santa, she believes that he is mocking her childhood, and throws him out. Later, Charlie confesses to Scott how hard it is for him that Scott is never around like other fathers, and reveals the pressure he is under to conceal the secret that his father is Santa. Lucy manages to convince Charlie not to be mad at him, which leads Charlie to convince Carol that Scott is Santa by showing her the magic snow globe.
Curtis flies in to tell Scott about Toy Santa's plan. However, Scott has used up the last of his magic wooing Carol, and cannot return to the North Pole. With help from the Tooth Fairy, Scott and Curtis manage to get back, only for Toy Santa to find them and tie them up. Charlie and Carol spring them free by summoning the Tooth Fairy to fly them to the North Pole. Scott goes after Toy Santa, who has already left with the sleigh, riding Chet, a rambunctious reindeer-in-training, and they both crash back into the village. With an army of elves, Carol, Bernard, Charlie, and Curtis lead them into a snowball fight to overthrow the toy soldiers. Toy Santa is defeated and reduced to a six-inch height, Scott marries Carol in a ceremony, Scott transforms back into Santa, and Christmas proceeds as it always has. Scott and Charlie reveal the truth to Lucy about Scott being Santa Claus.
During the credits, Carol begins transforming into Mrs. Claus, and Toy Santa is at the Toy Store, dancing beside other toys (which are the ones who look like him).


== Cast ==
Tim Allen as Scott Calvin/Santa Claus (and the Toy Santa, too.)
Eric Lloyd as Charlie Calvin
Wendy Crewson as Laura Miller
Judge Reinhold as Dr. Neal Miller
Elizabeth Mitchell as Principal Carol Newman
David Krumholtz as Head Elf Bernard
Spencer Breslin as Curtis the Elf
Liliana Mumy as Lucy Miller
Danielle Woodman as Abby the Elf
Aisha Tyler as Mother Nature
Peter Boyle as Father Time
Jay Thomas as Easter Bunny
Kevin Pollak as Cupid
Art LaFleur as Tooth Fairy
Michael Dorn as Sandman
Molly Shannon as Tracy


=== Reindeer Voice Cast ===
Bob Bergen as Comet
Kath Soucie as Chet


== Production ==
A teaser trailer for this film originally referred to it as Santa Clause 2: The Escape Clause, scheduled for release in November 2001. The subtitle would later become the subtitle of the following sequel in 2006.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 56% based on 122 reviews, with an average rating of 5.57/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Though it's harmless as family entertainment and has moments of charm, The Santa Clause 2 is also predictable and forgettable." On Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating to reviews, the film has a weighted average score of 48 out of 100, based on 26 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale.The Santa Clause 2 was nominated for a Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film.


=== Box office ===
The Santa Clause 2 grossed $139.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $33.6 million in other territories, for a total of $172.8 million, against a production budget of $65 million. It was the fifth-highest-grossing holiday movie.


== Soundtrack ==
Original Release Date: November 1, 2002

Everybody Loves Christmas – Eddie Money & Ronnie Spector
Santa Claus Lane – Hilary Duff
Santa's Got A Brand New Bag – SHeDAISY
Jingle Bells – Brian Setzer
Run Rudolph Run – Chuck Berry
'Zat You, Santa Claus? – Louis Armstrong
Santa Claus Is Comin' to Town – Smokey Robinson & the Miracles
Blue Holiday – The Shirelles
Unwritten Christmas – Unwritten Law & Sum 41
I'm Gonna Lasso Santa Claus – Brenda Lee
Santa Claus Is Coming to Town – Steve Tyrell
North Pole (Score) – George S. Clinton


== Home media ==
The film was released on DVD and VHS on November 18, 2003. Along with the other two Santa Clause films, it was re-released in a 3-Movie Collection DVD set in 2007 and a 3-Movie Collection Blu-ray set on October 16, 2012.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
The Santa Clause 2 at IMDb
The Santa Clause 2 at AllMovie
The Santa Clause 2 at Box Office Mojo