The Cobbler is a 2014 American magic realism comedy-drama film directed by Tom McCarthy and co-written by McCarthy with Paul Sado. The film stars Adam Sandler, Dan Stevens, Dustin Hoffman and Steve Buscemi. It was screened in the Special Presentations section at the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival. The film was released on March 13, 2015, by Image Entertainment. The film was panned by critics and was a box office bomb.


== Plot ==
In the Lower East Side NYC in 1903, a group of Jewish men gather in a cobbler's shop to discuss a neighborhood problem. Gergerman has been threatening their businesses, harassing them and their families. Handing a pair of Gergerman's shoes to the cobbler, Pinchas Simkin, he takes them to the shop basement and uses a special stitching machine on the shoes. His young son Herschel enters, and he explains how important the machine is.
In the present day, the great-grandson of Pinchas, Max Simkin is the cobbler. Jimmy operates the barber shop next door. Carmen Herrera, a young woman of the Lower East Side is fighting against large developers who are tearing down parts of the neighborhood to build huge complexes. Max doesn't seem to care at all about the shop. He lives at home with his ailing mother Sarah and wishes they could see Max's father again.
Local thug Leon Ludlow brings his shoes to the shop to resole them. Max's current stitching machine fails, so he uses the old one. He checks Ludlow's shoe size; it's 10 1/2, the same as his. Max tries the shoes on and transforms into Ludlow. He uses the machine on other shoes, and realizes what he can do with it.
Max experiments living as someone else, going to Chinatown as a Chinese man, going to a restaurant as one and leaving as another, not paying. Taryn brings in her British boyfriend Emiliano's shoes, and Max uses them. As Emiliano, he goes to a bar, noticed by beautiful women. One approaches him, noting that she once saw him leaving with a man. Going to his home as Emiliano, he finds Taryn taking a shower and she invites him to join her. He eagerly starts to undress, then realizes if he takes off a shoe, he will no longer be Emiliano, so he leaves. Max decides to make his mother happy by using the shoes of his father Abraham. Having dinner with Sarah as Abraham gives her one more night of happiness.
The next morning Sarah has died, so he and his family sit shiva for the week. When he returns to work, Ludlow demands his shoes back or he'll kill Max. Using several pairs of shoes to disguise himself, Max follows Ludlow to his apartment. Using Ludlow's shoes, he meets his girlfriend Macy, who has apparently been abused by Ludlow. Max searches for his valuable watches, which he takes; he also finds a cache of weapons. The real Ludlow returns and starts to strangle Max (still in Ludlow's shoes) until Max tasers him. Ludlow-Max goes with two associates of Ludlow where a man is held captive for stealing. About to kill him on Ludlow's orders, Ludlow-Max tells them to free him. Then they go meet slum lord Elaine Greenawalt, who gives him lots of money to buy out a man from his building.
Max goes back to Ludlow's wearing the transsexual's stilettos. Ludlow attacks, but stops when Max removes a shoe and reverts to himself. Resuming the attack, Max kills Ludlow with the shoe. Max turns himself in to the police, but when they go to the apartment, all the evidence is gone. He is left, alone and confused. Jimmy confronts Max about his recent odd behavior, telling Max the secret, that his father did the same thing before he disappeared.
Max goes with Carmen to Mr. Solomon's, the man Greenawalt wants to buy out. He refuses to leave, as he has lived there for decades and raised his daughter there. Max devises a plan to trick Greenawalt into giving him a large amount of money while still letting Solomon keep his home. When she realizes she's been played, she goes to Solomon's and threatens to kill him. She is caught on camera, and later arrested. Max's life starts to go back to normal. Carmen goes into the shop and invites him to dinner. He later goes to Ludlow's as Ludlow, giving the watches to Macy, telling her he's sorry and that she deserves better. As he leaves, he is abducted by a group of men led by the man he had saved. They are about to drive off when their car is struck.
He wakes up in Jimmy's barber shop and is offered some water and a pickle, as pickles help with the transition from one body to another. Max asks how he knew that, Jimmy takes off his shoes revealing that he is actually Abraham, his father. The real Jimmy is in the Caribbean. Both elated and angry, Max hugs his dad, then is shown a huge collection of shoes that he's gathered over the years. Abraham then takes Max in his limo through the city, telling him the story of how the stitching machine came into their family.


== Cast ==
Adam Sandler as Max Simkin
Method Man as Leon Ludlow
Dustin Hoffman as Abraham Simkin
Steve Buscemi as Jimmy
Melonie Diaz as Carmen Herrara
Ellen Barkin as Elaine Greenawalt
Dan Stevens as Emiliano
Sondra James as Anna O'Hara
Dascha Polanco as Macy
Lynn Cohen as Sarah Simkin
Fritz Weaver as Mr. Solomon
Kim Cloutier as Taryn
Adam B. Shapiro as Schneider
Danny Mastrogiorgio as Brian
Elena Kampouris as Alexia


== Production ==
On September 19, 2013, Adam Sandler was in talks to join Tom McCarthy's The Cobbler, which began shooting in November 2013. Voltage Pictures fully financed the film and it was produced by Mary Jane Skalski. On November 12, 2013 Dan Stevens joined the cast. Dustin Hoffman and Steve Buscemi also joined cast during shooting on November 18, 2013. Other cast members include Melonie Diaz, Method Man, Sondra James, Kevin Breznahan, Greta Lee and Craig Walker. On September 9, 2014, Image Entertainment acquired the US distribution rights to the film for $3.5 million.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography began on November 11, 2013, in New York City, before Sandler began his next project Men, Women & Children.


== Release and reception ==
The Cobbler was released in a limited release and through video on demand on March 13, 2015, and since its release, it has been reported to be the biggest box-office flop of Adam Sandler's career – earning only $24,000 at the U.S. box office in its opening weekend. Outside of North America, the film earned $1.2 million and another $2 million from domestic video sales.


=== Critical response ===
The Cobbler has been panned by critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a rating of 10%, based on 70 reviews, with a weighted average score of 3.16/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "The Cobbler represents a slight step up from Adam Sandler's recent comedies, but while its cloying sentiment proves a more palatable substitute for his usual crass humor, it still isn't terribly compelling." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 23 out of 100, based on reviews from 22 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".Uri Klein of Haaretz pointed out that while The Cobbler is "one of the few times in Sandler's career in which he has chosen to work for a director with a certain pedigree", and "the plot has fantastical impersonation elements that links it to comedians of an earlier era, such as Jerry Lewis and Danny Kaye", the result is unsatisfying in terms of both plot and characters. The A.V. Club chose the film as the worst film of 2015. The Cobbler was discussed extensively on the October 22nd episode of Chapo Trap House during which the film was largely panned by the show's hosts.Jared Mobarak of The Film Stage gave the film a positive review, noting that "embraces its slightness to warm hearts" and praised Method Man in particular for his performance.


=== Lawsuit ===
The Cobbler was a litigant to lawsuit, where an individual was accused of illegally downloading this movie. The significance is that the judge ruled that the IP address provided by the Internet Service Provider did not meet the test to definitively associate a person with a specific activity.


=== Accolades ===


== References ==


== External links ==
The Cobbler at IMDb
The Cobbler at Rotten Tomatoes
The Cobbler at Metacritic
The Cobbler at AllMovie