Tupac: Resurrection is a 2003 American documentary film about the life and death of rapper Tupac Shakur. The film, directed by Lauren Lazin and released by Paramount Pictures, is narrated by Tupac Shakur himself. The film was in theaters from November 16, 2003 to December 21, 2003. As of July 1, 2008 it had earned over $7.8 million, making it the 21st-highest-grossing documentary film in the United States - (in nominal dollars, from 1982 to the present). The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature at the 77th Academy Awards.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Tupac: Resurrection has an approval rating of 78% on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, based on 90 reviews, and an average rating of 6.75/10. The website's critical consensus states, "There's no question where the director's loyalty lies in this one-sided tribute; however, Tupac's charisma makes this doc an engaging sit". Metacritic assigned the film a weighted average score of 66 out of 100, based on 33 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".


== Soundtrack ==

An official 14-track soundtrack album was released, although it only contained nine songs that featured in the movie.  The following tracks, listed alphabetically by title, are written and/or performed by Tupac and feature in the film:

2 of Amerikaz Most Wanted
Ballad of a Dead Soulja
Black Jesuz
Breathin
Brenda's Got a Baby
California Love Remix
Can U C the Pride in the Panther - Performed by Mos Def
Case of the Misplaced Mic
Changes
Cradle to the Grave
Dear Mama
Everything They Owe
Fame
Family Tree - Performed by Lamar Antwon Robinson
Hail Mary
Hell 4 a Hustler
Hit 'Em Up
Holler If Ya Hear Me
Homeboyz
I Get Around
I'm Gettin Money
If I Die 2 Nite
Keep Ya Head Up
Let Em Have It
Letter to the President
Lil' Homies
Me Against the World
Military Minds
My Block (Nitty Remix)
My Closest Roaddogz
Never B Peace (Nitty Remix)
Niggaz Nature Remix
Nothin' to Lose
One Day at a Time (Em's Version)
Only Fear of Death
Open Fire
Outlaw
Panther Power
Part Time Mutha
The Realist Killas
Rebel of the Underground
Runnin' (Dying to Live)
Same Song – Performed by Digital Underground
Secretz of War
So Many Tears
St. Ides Malt Liquor Commercial
Starin' Through My Rear View
Still Ballin' (Nitty Remix)
Street Fame (Briss Remix)
Strictly for My N.I.G.G.A.Z.
Super Freak
Temptations
Thug N U Thug N Me
Thugz Mansion (7 Remix)
Trapped
U Can Call (Jazze Pha Remix)
Under Pressure
Until the End of Time
U R Ripping Us Apart!!! - Performed by Dead Prez
When Thugz Cry
When We Ride on Our Enemies (Briss Remix)
Wife 4 Life - 4th Avenue Jones'
Wonda Why They Call U Bitch
Worldwide Mob Figgaz
Y'all Don't Know Us
You Don't Bring Me Flowers (feat. Ice T)The following tracks, which Tupac had no input on, are also featured in the film:

America The Beautiful
All Along The Watchtower - Jimi Hendrix
All That You Have Is Your Soul - Tracy Chapman
Black Seeds Keep On Growing
Exodus - Bob Marley
Humpty Dance - Digital Underground
Inner City Blues - Marvin Gaye
Know The Ledge - Eric B. & Rakim
Living For The City - Stevie Wonder
Paid In Full - Eric B. & Rakim
Parents Just Don't Understand - DJ Jazzy Jeff & The Fresh Prince
Smooth Operator - Sade
Vincent - Don McLean
Waiting For You - Tony! Toni! Tone!
Wuthering Heights - Kate Bush


== Certifications ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official site
Tupac: Resurrection at IMDb
Tupac: Resurrection at Rotten Tomatoes
Box Office Mojo
Tupac Amaru Shakur Foundation Official Site