Blue Valentine  is a 2010 American romantic drama film written and directed by Derek Cianfrance. Cianfrance, Cami Delavigne, and Joey Curtis wrote the film, and Michelle Williams and Ryan Gosling played the lead roles and served as co-executive producers. The band Grizzly Bear scored the film. Blue Valentine depicts a married couple, played by Gosling and Williams, shifting back and forth in time between their courtship and the dissolution of their marriage several years later.
The film received critical acclaim and Williams was nominated for both the Academy Award for Best Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama, while Gosling received a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama.


== Plot ==

Dean (Ryan Gosling) is a hopeless-romantic high-school dropout, working for a moving company in Brooklyn. Cindy (Michelle Williams) is an aspiring doctor studying pre-med while living with her bickering parents and caring for her grandmother in Pennsylvania. Her boyfriend, a fellow student named Bobby, brings her back to his place, where the two have intercourse, but he ejaculates inside her without her consent. This causes an angered Cindy to break up with him. Some time later, while Dean is delivering furniture to a nursing home in Pennsylvania, he runs into Cindy, who is visiting her grandmother. He gives her his number but she never calls; however, they coincidentally meet again on a bus and begin dating shortly afterwards. A jealous Bobby soon finds out and violently assaults Dean.
Cindy discovers she is pregnant and tells Dean he is unlikely to be the father. She opts for an abortion but cancels the procedure at the last moment. Dean comforts and reassures her that he wants to raise the child together. Cindy and Dean get married.
Five years later, the couple lives in rural Pennsylvania with their daughter, Frankie. Cindy is now a nurse at a clinic where her boss, Dr. Feinberg, had just offered her to join him at a different clinic in the near future. Meanwhile, Dean paints houses for a living while struggling with alcohol. One day, their missing family dog is found dead by the side of the road due to Cindy having left a gate unlocked, which further strains the couple's marriage. Despite Cindy's reluctance, Dean insists on a romantic getaway at a motel to relax and attempt to rekindle their relationship. Stopping by a liquor store, Cindy has an awkward encounter when running into Bobby, which causes an ensuing argument in the car between her and Dean.
At the motel, Dean repeatedly tries to seduce Cindy but she rebuffs him. Frustrated with Dean's lack of ambition, she questions him during dinner which leads to another argument. The two make up and get drunk but Cindy is displeased when Dean asks if she wants to have another child with him. They start fighting and she locks him outside the bedroom. Early in the morning, Cindy is called in for work. She takes the car and leaves a note for Dean. At the clinic, Dr. Feinberg recommends that Cindy get an apartment instead of moving her family, suggesting that they could keep each other company during the weekdays if she's lonely. Visibly upset, Cindy voices that she thought he offered the position because of her qualifications.
Back at the motel, an annoyed Dean finds the note and shows up drunk at the clinic where he has a heated argument with Cindy. Dean punches Dr. Feinberg, who fires Cindy and kicks them out. While leaving the clinic, Cindy demands a divorce. At her parents’ house, Dean tries to persuade Cindy to give the marriage another chance for the sake of Frankie. Cindy says she'd rather not have Frankie grow up with parents who despise each other.
After Dean reminds Cindy of their vows, they both apologize and hug but she pulls away. Dean leaves the house while Frankie runs after him and begs him to stay. He guides her into returning to Cindy and continues walking away. The film ends with photos of Dean and Cindy in the early stages of their romance.


== Cast ==
Ryan Gosling as Dean Pereira
Michelle Williams as Cindy Heller
Faith Wladyka as Frances "Frankie" Pereira
John Doman as Jerry Heller
Mike Vogel as Bobby Ontario
Marshall Johnson as Marshall
Jen Jones as Gramma
Ben Shenkman as Dr. Feinberg
Maryann Plunkett as Glenda


== Production ==
Williams was 21 when she received the script in 2002 and Gosling committed to the production four years later, but filming did not begin until 2009, when Williams was 28 (as was Gosling), owing to Cianfrance's inability to find financing. The director was also unable to film the "young" and "older" scenes several years apart as he had hoped, again due to lack of money. The film was to be shot in California but production was moved to Brooklyn, New York and Honesdale, Pennsylvania. Williams wanted to stay close to her Brooklyn home to take care of her daughter, Matilda (after the passing of Heath Ledger the year prior), so the director chose Honesdale due to its proximity to Brooklyn.

Gosling and Williams improvised dialogue; the scene in which their characters wander through New York together was unscripted, for example; the actors—who had both appeared in The United States of Leland (2003) but had not shared scenes—got to know each other during its filming. Before filming the marriage dissolution between the main characters, Gosling and Williams prepared by renting a home, bringing their own clothing and belongings, buying groceries with a budget based on their characters' incomes, filming home movies and taking a family portrait at a local Sears with the actress who played their daughter, and staging out arguments. Cianfrance visited the actors and assisted them in building tension while remaining in character: "One night he told Gosling to go into Williams' bedroom and try to make love to her. Gosling, soundly rejected, ended up sleeping on the couch."The film was shot in Super 16mm and Red One. The former was used for the pre-marriage scenes and the latter was used for the post-marriage scenes.
Andrij Parekh used only one professional light in the filming of the outside scenes, otherwise using only practical lights for the inside scenes.
While on The Hollywood Reporter Director's Roundtable, Cianfrance said that he had given up his entire director's fee to help fund the film: "I mean, it came down to we were exactly my fee short. They paid me and I just paid it back. So I still have to pay taxes on it, you know. So I actually had to pay to make the movie."


=== Music ===
Gosling wrote and performed some songs by himself. The band Grizzly Bear composed the score of the film. A soundtrack for the film was released by Lakeshore Records.
One of the film's feature songs, "You and Me", which is presented as the couple's personal song, was originally recorded as a demo by a group called Penny & The Quarters for the obscure Prix Label of Columbus, Ohio in the early 1970s. It was re-released on a compilation album by the Numero Group in 2007 without the members of the group being identified.


== Release ==
The film premiered in competition at the 26th Sundance Film Festival. The film was screened in the Un Certain Regard section at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival and premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 15, 2010. In Australia, the film was released on December 26, 2010 through Palace Films. In the United States, it was distributed by The Weinstein Company as a limited release on December 29, 2010.


=== Rating ===
On October 8, 2010, Blue Valentine was given an NC-17 rating by the MPAA for American cinemas. This was due to a scene depicting cunnilingus. Gosling accused the MPAA of sexism and misogyny. "There's plenty of oral sex scenes in a lot of movies, where it's a man receiving it from a woman – and they're R-rated. Ours is reversed and somehow it's perceived as pornographic", he stated. The Weinstein Company appealed the decision and aimed for an R without any trims to the film, believing the prior decision would significantly harm the film's potential box office take in the United States. The appeal was successful on December 8, 2010, and the film received an R rating.
The film was given an uncut 15 certificate from the British Board of Film Classification.


=== Home media ===
The film was released on DVD and Blu-ray on May 10, 2011. Special features include an audio commentary with director Derek Cianfrance, a making-of documentary, deleted scenes, and home movies. The film has grossed $5,336,207 through US video sales.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Blue Valentine received critical acclaim. Rotten Tomatoes, a review aggregator, reports that 87% of 209 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review; the average rating is 7.80/10. The website's critical consensus states: "This emotionally gripping examination of a marriage on the rocks isn't always easy to watch, but Michelle Williams and Ryan Gosling give performances of unusual depth and power." On Metacritic, the film has an average score of 81 out of 100 based on 42 reviews, meaning "universal acclaim".Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film 3.5 out of 4, and wrote: "Dean seems stuck. He seems to stay fixed at the initial stage. Can you see the difference between (1) "He loves me as much as he always did", and (2) "He loves me exactly like he always did"? I've read reviews saying Cianfrance isn't clear about what went wrong as they got from there to here. Is anybody?"


=== Top ten lists ===
Blue Valentine was listed on many critics' top ten lists.


=== Accolades ===
In 2006, the script won the Chrysler Film Project, a competition that awards cash to an outstanding new feature film director overseen by Independent Feature Project.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Blue Valentine at IMDb
Blue Valentine at Box Office Mojo
Blue Valentine at Rotten Tomatoes
Blue Valentine at Metacritic