Wrong Turn is a 2003 slasher film directed by Rob Schmidt and written by Alan B. McElroy. The film stars Desmond Harrington, Eliza Dushku, Emmanuelle Chriqui, Jeremy Sisto, Kevin Zegers and Lindy Booth. The film was released on May 30, 2003.


== Plot ==
College students Rich Stoker and Halley Smith are rock climbing in a remote forest of West Virginia. When Rich reaches the top, he is suddenly murdered before he can help Halley up. Someone then begins to yank Halley up the cliff, forcing her to cut the rope and fall to the ground. She attempts to escape but gets caught in a line of barbed wire and is pulled back into the woods, screaming.
Three days later, medical student Chris Flynn drives through the mountains of Greenbrier County on his way to a business meeting. En route when a traffic jam is caused by a chemical spill, he stops at a gas station to ask for directions from an elderly man and decides to go down a different route through a dirt road to Bear Mountain which he finds on the gas station's map. He collides with a stationed SUV whose tires have been punctured. The vehicle belongs to a group of youths on a camping trip: Jessie, Carly, Scott, Evan and Francine, who soon realized that their tire puncture was not an accident after Jessie finds a strip of barbed wire tied to a tree. Evan and Francine stay to watch the cars as the others go to find help, but both of them are later murdered by a figure when they stumble into the woods. The others find an isolated cabin and go inside to use the phone, but they are horrified to find human body parts in the house and attempt to leave before forcing themselves to hide inside when the occupants return home. Three cannibalistic inbred mountain men: Three Finger, Saw Tooth and One Eye enter the cabin with Francine's corpse, and the hiding group watch as Francine's body is dismembered and eaten.
After the cannibals fall asleep, the group attempts to escape. However, the cannibals awaken and chase them through the forest. The group runs into a clearing where they find cars belonged to previous victims and they try to make up an escape plan but when Chris gets shot in the leg while trying to distract the cannibals, Scott creates another diversion for the other three to escape but gets killed with arrows. Jessie, Carly, and Chris stumble upon an old watchtower and find a radio inside, which they try to use to call for help. Later, the cannibals arrive and are alerted when the radio starts responding to the group's call. Unable to get inside, the cannibals set the tower on fire to burn the group alive, but they escape by jumping out of the window to the trees. In the subsequent chase, Three Finger catches Carly and decapitates her with an axe. Chris pulls a branch while Jessie lures Three Finger for the former to release it, knocking Three Finger off to the ground. Jessie and Chris manage to escape and hide in a cave until the morning. The cannibals then find them, pushing Chris down the hill and taking Jessie back to their cabin. Chris survives the fall and meets a police officer, but the officer is killed by Saw Tooth, who shoots him in the eye with an arrow. Chris hitches a ride underneath the truck as it is driven back to the cabin by Saw Tooth. Chris drives through the building and runs into One Eye before he releases Jessie and proceeds to fight the cannibals. They escape as Chris kills the cannibals by blowing up their cabin. The pair then drives out of the forest in the cannibals' pickup truck and stumbles upon the gas station nearby; Chris takes the map to prevent others from the same wrong turn before he and Jessie leave.
In the credits scene, a deputy sheriff, who had received the radio call earlier, investigates the remains of the destroyed cabin. Laughing insanely, Three Finger, who survived the explosion, rises and kills the deputy.


== Cast ==
Desmond Harrington as Chris Flynn
Eliza Dushku as Jessie Burlingame
Emmanuelle Chriqui as Carly
Jeremy Sisto as Scott
Kevin Zegers as Evan
Lindy Booth as Francine
Julian Richings as Three Finger
Garry Robbins as Saw Tooth
Ted Clark as One Eye
Yvonne Gaudry as Halley Smith
Joel Harris as Richard "Rich" Stoker
David Huband as Trooper
Wayne Robson as Old Man
James Downing as Trucker


== Production ==
Development for the film began in 2001 when it was announced Summit Entertainment and Newmarket Group teamed to produce “Wrong Turn,” a 1970s-style horror pic to be directed by Rob Schmidt. Alan McElroy (“Spawn”) wrote the script. The movie was a co-production, Summit Entertainment and Constantin Films, with Stan Winston designing the creature effects and serving as a producer. Inking a deal with Fox-based Regency Enterprises, the co-financiers of Wrong Turn secured domestic distribution through Fox. Fox reportedly had trouble securing an R-Rating from the MPAA due to the film's intense violence with many of the TV spots for the film also refused approval, this is possibly one of the reasons why subsequent Wrong Turn movies were released straight to video.


== Music ==
Two soundtracks were released; one contains the original film score, and the other contains popular music.


=== Soundtrack ===


=== Track listing ===
"In Stance" – Eris
"Bloody Fingers" – Jet Black Summer
"Every Famous Last Word" – Miracle of 86
"Never Said Anything" – The Belles
"Why Would I Want to Die?" – Grandaddy
"Haunted" – King Black Acid
"Three Murders" – Deadman
"Ex" – Tara King Theory
"Birthday" – Simple
"Even the Scars Forget the Wound" – Gruvis Malt
"He's a Killer" – DJ Swamp
"Bring the Pain"/"Multiple Incisions" – Candiria
"If Only" – Queens of the Stone Age
"Wish I May" – Breaking Benjamin


=== Score ===


=== Track listing ===
"Dark Forest"
"Wrong Turn Title"
"Mountain Men"
"Cabin In The Woods"
"Adventure Begins"
"Mountain Men At Home"
"Francine Dies"
"Jessie"
"Scott Becomes Prey"
"Bear Trap"
"Escape From Cabin"
"Jessie Taken Hostage"
"Fire In The Watchtower"
"Grim Discovery"
"Are We Safe?"
"They Got Carly"
"Killing Mountain Men"
"We Are Alive"
"Three Finger is Back"


== Reception ==
Rotten Tomatoes, a review aggregator, reports that 40% of 83 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review; the average rating was 4.22/10.  The consensus is: "An unremarkable slasher flick that fails to distinguish itself from others of its ilk". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "C–" on an A+ to F scale.


== Sequels ==

Wrong Turn was followed by several films including two sequels, Wrong Turn 2: Dead End (2007) and Wrong Turn 3: Left for Dead (2009), two prequels leading to the events of the original film, Wrong Turn 4: Bloody Beginnings (2011) and Wrong Turn 5: Bloodlines (2012), and a reboot, Wrong Turn 6: Last Resort (2014).
In October 2018, a reboot simply titled Wrong Turn (2021) was announced. The film was written by original film's writer Alan B. McElroy and directed by Mike P. Nelson. Principal photography for the movie began on September 9, 2019.released on 2021


== References ==


== External links ==
Wrong Turn at IMDb
Wrong Turn at AllMovie
Wrong Turn at Box Office Mojo
Wrong Turn at Rotten Tomatoes